---
title: "Great Recession showed countries can’t fight the coronavirus economic crisis alone"
date: "2020-04-01T2202"
hero: "http://l.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/BhxVF4xRugnpD5knkxmerQ--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-us/usa_today_opinion_532/1eebb21fbed68e41bb5ee8ce5501d819"
---
As the world economy enters an unprecedented crisis caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, and policymakers in Washington and other global
capitals prepare record fiscal [stimulus plans][1], stakeholders should
heed an important lesson from the last financial downturn in 2008:
Recovery is only possible through coordinated global action.

A little more than 10 years ago, as the world was entering the Great
Recession, stakeholders had to look far back in the rearview mirror to
the Great Depression for policy guidance. While the actions of the 1930s
did offer important lessons for 2008 — most notably the need to expand
the money supply — the economy of the 1930s was fundamentally different
than the global economy of the early part of this century.

## A lesson from the Great Recession

By 2008, the S&P 500 had grown approximately [tenfold][2] over the
previous 80 years, the world’s labor market had moved from one largely
rooted in agriculture to one firmly based in industrial and digital
sectors, and the global trading system had become the foundation of
national economies. Compared with the 1930s, stakeholders in 2008 were
operating in an interconnected world with a global financial system and
were therefore largely in unchartered waters.

If there is a silver lining in the economic portion of the crisis we are
seeing unfold today, it is that the relatively compressed timeline
between 2008 and today means there is great relevance in one of the most
consequential approaches policymakers employed then. In particular, the
lesson of 2008 is that a globalized economy necessitates a global
solution.

Today, the economic outlook for the world is bleak, with the coronavirus
crisis already causing one of the most severe shocks to global growth in
a century. [Projections][3] are that the second quarter of 2020 will be
the worst quarter in generations.

In Thornton, Colorado, on March 26, 2020.

More

Though the scale of today’s crisis may be larger and the contours
certainly different than that of 2008 — notably, we are facing a supply
shock as leaders are rightly enacting measures to physically prevent
industries from operating — the fact is that in its interconnections,
today’s economy is structurally similar to the one that was in place a
little over a decade ago.

Because the economy of the 2008 period was so interconnected, analysts
[referred][4] to the subprime lending that triggered the crisis as
“contagions.” That June, three months before the [collapse of Lehman
Bros.][5], two economists at the International Monetary Fund compared
these shocks to an “epidemic in which an [invisible virus infects many
people and communities][6].” These words are darkly apt for today.

 **After the coronavirus:**[America needs to reengage with the world,
not retreat from it][7]

Understanding that the world’s economies were intertwined, policymakers
took unprecedented steps. Most notably, in October 2008, major central
banks across the world cut interest rates[ simultaneously][8]. And with
the threat of another Great Depression looming, the Group of 20 leading
nations became a powerful, action-oriented body, convening heads of
state and government in coordinating a global response to the crisis.
These actions were key to staving off the worst and repositioning the
world economy toward growth.

## Trade should not be a weapon

Unlike a decade ago, this time we are fighting a real contagion. And
unlike a decade ago, we are faced with a much more polarized world with
a weaker economic “immune system.” The pandemic comes within an
unsettled global environment, as major economic powers have been using
trade as a weapon rather than a means for joint prosperity.

Market unions that were once strong have been tested by fracture. And
many countries have looked at shared challenges, such as climate change,
through a prism of competition rather than coordination. At the same
time, overall global debt has reached a high of [$184 trillion][9] —
more than 11 percentage points of GDP higher than in 2009. This is
before needed stimulus has been spent.

 **Look to history for hope:**[Past crises show how we can learn and
grow][10]

But like a decade ago, it would be a mistake for leaders to think they
can respond to the crisis alone. While the coronavirus necessitates the
distancing of those who are sick and the closure of borders in some
instances, these measures cannot be prescriptions for our long-term
economic well-being. Trade represents close to [60% of global gross
domestic product][11], and national economies cannot thrive in
isolation.

As the virus abates, countries will need to strengthen global commerce
together and ensure those countries challenged by less resources in
reserve have the means to recover. Leaders are hopefully looking back
and approaching the recovery in a posture of coordination.

 _Børge Brende is president of the[World Economic Forum][12]. Follow him
on Twitter: [@borgebrende][13]_

 _You can read diverse opinions from our[Board of Contributors][14] and
other writers on the [Opinion front page][15], on Twitter
[@usatodayopinion][16] and in our [daily Opinion newsletter][17]. To
respond to a column, submit a comment to letters@usatoday.com._

 _This article originally appeared on USA TODAY:[Coronavirus economic
crisis: Great Recession showed global fix is key][18]_

   [1]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/03/27/coronavirus-house-set-pass-stimulus-package-includes-checks/2923953001/
   [2]: https://www.macrotrends.net/2324/sp-500-historical-chart-data
   [3]: https://fortune.com/2020/03/20/coronavirus-economic-predictions-goldman-sachs-recession-gdp-2q-2020/
   [4]: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2010/html/sp100907.en.html
   [5]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2018/09/13/lehman-next-financial-crisis-matter-when-not-if-editorials-debates/1269326002/
   [6]: https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2008/06/dodd.htm
   [7]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2020/03/31/after-coronavirus-america-needs-engagement-not-retreat-column/5081909002/
   [8]: https://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/09/business/worldbusiness/09iht-09fed.16801046.html
   [9]: https://blogs.imf.org/2019/01/02/new-data-on-global-debt/
   [10]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2020/03/29/coronavirus-pandemic-past-crises-reasons-for-hope-column/5083074002/
   [11]: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/ne.trD.gnfs.Zs
   [12]: https://www.weforum.org
   [13]: https://twitter.com/borgebrende?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor
   [14]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2020/01/12/usa-today-board-of-contributors-opinion-columns/2601030001/
   [15]: http://usatoday.com/opinion/
   [16]: https://twitter.com/usatodayopinion
   [17]: https://profile.usatoday.com/newsletters/opinion/
   [18]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2020/04/01/coronavirus-economic-crisis-calls-for-global-solution-column/5090913002/