---
title: "Great Recession showed countries can’t fight the coronavirus economic crisis alone"
date: 2020-04-01T1401
hero: "http://l.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/BhxVF4xRugnpD5knkxmerQ--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-us/usa_today_opinion_532/1eebb21fbed68e41bb5ee8ce5501d819"
---
As the world economy enters an unprecedented crisis caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, and policymakers in Washington and other global
capitals prepare record fiscal [stimulus plans][1], stakeholders should
heed an important lesson from the last financial downturn in 2008:
Recovery is only possible through coordinated global action.

A little more than 10 years ago, as the world was entering the Great
Recession, stakeholders had to look far back in the rear-view mirror to
the Great Depression for policy guidance. While the actions of the 1930s
did offer important lessons for 2008 — most notably the need to expand
the money supply — the economy of the 1930s was fundamentally different
than the global economy of the early part of this century.

## A lesson from the Great Recession

By 2008, the S&P 500 had grown approximately [tenfold][2] over the
previous 80 years, the world’s labor market had moved from one largely
rooted in agriculture to one firmly based in industrial and digital
sectors, and the global trading system had become the foundation of
national economies. Compared to the 1930s, stakeholders in 2008 were
operating in an interconnected world with a global financial system and
were therefore largely in unchartered waters.

If there is a silver lining in the economic portion of the crisis we are
seeing unfold today, it is that the relatively compressed timeline
between 2008 and today means there is great relevance in one of the most
consequential approaches policymakers employed then. In particular, the
lesson of 2008 is that a globalized economy necessitates a global
solution.

Today, the economic outlook for the world is bleak, with the coronavirus
crisis already causing one of the most severe shocks to global growth in
a century. [Projections][3] are that the second quarter of 2020 will be
the worst quarter in generations.

In Thornton, Colorado, on March 26, 2020.

More

Though the scale of today’s crisis may be larger and the contours
certainly different than that of 2008 — notably, we are now facing a
supply shock as leaders are rightly enacting measures to physically
prevent industries from operating — the fact is that in its
interconnections, today’s economy is structurally similar to the one
that was in place a little over a decade ago.

Because the economy of the 2008 period was so interconnected, analysts
[referred][4] to the subprime lending that triggered the crisis as
“contagions.”  In June 2008, three months before the collapse of Lehman
Brothers, two economists at the International Monetary Fund[
compared][5] these shocks to an “epidemic in which an invisible virus
infects many people and communities.” These words are darkly apt for
today.

 **After the coronavirus:**[America needs to reengage with the world,
not retreat from it][6]

Understanding that the world’s economies were intertwined, policymakers
took unprecedented steps. Most notably, in October 2008, major central
banks across the world cut interest rates[ simultaneously][7]. And with
the threat of another Great Depression looming, the [G20][8] became a
powerful, action-oriented body, convening heads of state and government
in coordinating a global response to the crisis. These actions were key
to staving off the worst and repositioning the world economy toward
growth.

## Trade should not be a weapon

Unlike a decade ago, this time we are fighting a real contagion. And
unlike a decade ago, we are faced with a much more polarized world with
a weaker economic “immune system.” The pandemic comes within an
[unsettled][9] global environment, as major economic powers have been
using trade as a weapon rather than a means for joint prosperity.

Market unions that were once strong have been tested by fracture. And
many countries have looked at shared challenges, such as climate change,
through a prism of competition rather than coordination. At the same
time, overall global debt has reached a high of [$184 trillion][10] —
more than 11 percentage points of GDP higher than in 2009. This is
before needed stimulus has been spent.

   [1]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/03/27/coronavirus-house-set-pass-stimulus-package-includes-checks/2923953001/
   [2]: https://www.macrotrends.net/2324/sp-500-historical-chart-data
   [3]: https://fortune.com/2020/03/20/coronavirus-economic-predictions-goldman-sachs-recession-gdp-2q-2020/
   [4]: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2010/html/sp100907.en.html
   [5]: https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2008/06/pdf/dodd.pdf
   [6]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2020/03/31/after-coronavirus-america-needs-engagement-not-retreat-column/5081909002/
   [7]: https://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/09/business/worldbusiness/09iht-09fed.16801046.html
   [8]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/03/26/coronavirus-trump-g-20-leaders-pledge-5-trillion-global-economy/2916404001/
   [9]: https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/expansion-of-geopolitics-avoids-damaging-competition-by-borge-brende-1-2020-01
   [10]: https://blogs.imf.org/2019/01/02/new-data-on-global-debt/