---
title: "More than 1,000 in US die in a single day from coronavirus, doubling the worst daily death toll of the flu"
date: "2020-04-02T1801"
hero: "http://l2.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/d5VBh9t3Wjks6zJrCbFx_g--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-us/usa_today_news_641/34ea3ef0e378daf4ecd98a0dbec62b5a"
---
The U.S. topped 1,000 coronavirus deaths in a single day for the first
time Wednesday, a daily death toll more than double that of two of
America's most deadly illnesses – lung cancer and the flu.

Death counts from the virus are difficult to keep up to date, but the
[Johns Hopkins coronavirus database][1] – [whose sources ][2]include the
World Health Organization, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, the European CDC and the National Health Commission of China
– shows that the U.S. hit 1,040 cases Wednesday at 10:25 p.m. EDT. Since
the virus' first appearance in the U.S. in late January, 5,116 people
have died and more than 215,000 have been infected.

The previous high mark for a single day in the U.S. was Tuesday, with
504 deaths.

Some researchers say the daily death toll [could more than double –][3]
to 2,200 or more – by mid-April. That figure would eclipse heart
disease, the nation's No. 1 killer with about 1,772 deaths per day,
[according to the CDC][4].

“Our country is in the midst of a great national trial,” President
Donald Trump said in a White House briefing on the virus. “We’re going
to go through a very tough two weeks.”

Lung cancer [kills 433 people each day][5] in the U.S. – that's the same
number of seats on a Boeing 747 airplane, according to the Lung Cancer
Foundation of America. Breast cancer kills about [116 Americans a
day][6].

The flu, a chronic killer that the nation has come to expect in yearly
cycles – and the reason millions of Americans get flu shots – [killed an
estimated 508 people per day][7] in the U.S. during the 2017-18 flu
season, the nation's worst in the last decade, according to the CDC.
This year's flu season has recorded an average of 383 deaths per day,
CDC figures show.

While health officials say COVID-19 is considered a flash medical event
in that it is unlikely to maintain its deadly hold for more than three
or four months, the 1,000 threshold is a significant one because it
shows just how potent an unforeseen outbreak can be on the U.S. medical
system.

It also raises questions about COVID-19's possible deadly effects over
time. Anthony Fauci, a member of the White House Coronavirus Task Force,
has cautioned that the virus could become a recurring event, much like
the flu. He said that the U.S. needs to get ready for the next cycle,
possibly to occur in the fall of 2020.

"We really need to be prepared for another cycle," Fauci said.

Healthcare worker Ludnie Emile prepares to test people for COVID-19 at
their drive-thru coronavirus testing station in Palm Springs, Fla. on
March 19, 2020.

More

Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, emphasized the need to continue developing a vaccine and test
it quickly so it will be available "for that next cycle."

A University of Washington study updated [this week ][3]projects that if
the entire nation makes an all-out effort to restrict contact,
coronavirus deaths will peak in the next two weeks and patients will
overwhelm hospitals in most states.

Nationally, the University of Washington model predicts a peak daily
death toll of 2,214 in mid-April, and a total of 84,000 Americans dead
by the end of summer. That’s more than twice the lives claimed during
the 2018-19 flu season, which killed 34,000 people, according to the
CDC.

But that figure represents the model’s most likely estimate. The range
of scenarios spans from 36,000 COVID-19 deaths to more than 152,000,
according to the research team led by Christopher Murray, founder and
chair of the University of Washington’s Institute of Health Metrics and
Evaluation.

[As many as 240,000 Americans may die][8] from the new coronavirus
according to estimates released by the White House on Tuesday, a grim
prediction that influenced Trump's decision to extend social distancing
guidelines.

The daily coronavirus death toll likely won’t dip below 100 before June
11, the study predicts.

Coronavirus symptoms can be confused with that of the flu and, indeed,
the two viruses have similar effects. Tracking the flu has been equally
troublesome for health officials. The CDC says the burden of influenza
disease in the United States can vary widely and is determined by a
number of factors including the characteristics of circulating viruses,
the timing of the flu season, how well vaccines are working and how many
people got vaccinated.

Health experts say the future of the coronavirus depends on such factors
as whether humans develop increasing immunity to it and whether an
effective vaccine is developed. If neither occurs, the virus [will
likely continue to circulate][9] and establish itself as a common
respiratory virus like the flu.

The CDC [estimates that the flu ][7]has resulted in 9 million to 45
million illnesses, 140,000 to 810,000 hospitalizations and 12,000 to
61,000 deaths annually since 2010.

 _Contributing: Katie Wedell, Erin Mansfield and Dinah Pulver, USA TODAY
Network_

 _This article originally appeared on USA TODAY:[Coronavirus kills 1,000
in a single day in US, double that of the flu][10]_

   [1]: https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html
   [2]: https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map-faq.html
   [3]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2020/03/31/us-coronavirus-deaths-could-peak-mid-april-restrictions-states/5100513002/
   [4]: https://www.cdc.gov/heartdisease/facts.htm
   [5]: https://lcfamerica.org/lung-cancer-info/lung-cancer-facts/
   [6]: https://www.cancer.net/cancer-types/breast-cancer/statistics
   [7]: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/burden/index.html
   [8]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/03/31/trump-coronavirus-pandemic-could-kill-many-240-000-americans/5100446002/
   [9]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/health/2020/03/15/coronavirus-crisis-end-summer-experts-odds-what-we-dont-know-epic/5053876002/
   [10]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2020/04/01/coronavirus-kills-1-000-single-day-u-s-double-flu/5100905002/