---
title: "Pelosi forming House committee to investigate the coronavirus outbreak"
date: "2020-04-02T1842"
hero: "http://l.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/c4pU_olO6GHNoN4igUcwfQ--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-US/nbc_news_122/a26a1167ed55208be137c240f04dc8d4"
---
WASHINGTON — House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., announced Thursday
that a bipartisan House committee [will investigate][1] the federal
response to coronavirus pandemic and ensure that [congressional
funding][2] is spent wisely.

“The committee will be empowered to examine all aspects of the federal
response to the coronavirus, and to assure that the taxpayer dollars are
being wisely and efficiently spent to save lives, deliver relief and
benefit our economy,” Pelosi said during a conference call with
reporters.

House Majority Whip James Clyburn, D-S.C., will chair the newly formed
House committee, Pelosi said. She did not detail how many Republicans
and Democrats would serve on the committee.

"The importance of this committee’s work cannot be overstated," Clyburn
said in a statement about his appointment. "Just as the Truman
Commission in the 1940s investigated waste, corruption, and fraud during
World War II at the Defense Department, this select committee is tasked
with oversight of how the federal government spends the taxpayer-funded
$2 trillion allocated by Congress to address the COVID-19 crisis."

House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., voiced opposition to the
select committee Thursday on a separate press call.

He said that Congress already wrote oversight provisions into the latest
funding package. The GOP leader also said that he doesn’t support
Clyburn serving as the chairman.

McCarthy said Clyburn will seek to use the committee as an opportunity
to restructure government and the economy.

The committee will have subpoena power, said Pelosi. But she said the
committee should not be viewed as an investigation of the Trump
administration, adding she hopes Republicans will cooperate.

The panel will oversee the funding Congress has already approved in
three separate packages, including the $2 trillion stimulus bill. The
committee would also provide oversight of future funding.

Pelosi said she spoke to Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin about the
next funding package that Congress could consider when lawmakers return
to Washington.

Top House Democrats, including Intelligence Committee Chairman Adam
Schiff, D-Calif., have [proposed the formation of a 9/11-style
commission to investigate the coronavirus outbreak][3] in the U.S.

But Pelosi said while a commission, which would be a retrospective
review, is necessary, she wants the select committee to assess the
response in real time as the crisis continues to unfold. A commission
could be discussed in the future, she said.

Traditionally, select committees focus on one issue. Democrats, for
example, formed committees on climate change and the modernization of
Congress. When Republicans last controlled Congress, they formed a
select committee to investigate the 2012 Benghazi attacks.

In a sign of potential bipartisan cooperation, Sen. John Cornyn,
R-Texas, who was in the Capitol on Thursday to preside over a Senate pro
forma session, said that Congress needs to look into what went wrong
with the [spread of the coronavirus][4] and how to prepare for a future
pandemic.

“Probably the most important thing we need to do is learn the lessons
from this pandemic because we, we kind of got sucker-punched,” he said.

   [1]: https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/congress/congressional-leaders-confident-oversight-economic-package-despite-signing-statement-n1172521
   [2]: https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/congress/house-gives-final-passage-2-trillion-coronavirus-stimulus-bill-n1170281
   [3]: https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/congress/informal-discussions-begin-9-11-style-commission-coronavirus-response-n1173516
   [4]: https://www.nbcnews.com/health/health-news/live-blog/2020-04-02-coronavirus-news-n1174651