---
title: "Brazil: Amazon land defender Zezico Guajajara shot dead"
date: "2020-04-02T1116"
hero: "http://l1.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/62XrGoPVrV0ONJu_WMF1Vg--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-gb/bbc_us_articles_995/e6712c0c67508ca59fe03257e13ef8a4"
---
A member of a protected tribe in the Amazon has been killed by gunmen,
authorities in the Brazilian state of Maranhao say.

The body of Zezico Guajajara, of the Guajajara tribe, was found near his
village on Tuesday. He had been shot.

The former teacher was a supporter of Guardians of the Forest, a group
formed to combat logging gangs in the area.

The killing - the fifth in six months - increases concerns about
violence against Amazon forest protectors.

Brazil's populist President Jair Bolsonaro has drawn intense domestic
and international criticism for failing to protect the Guardians'
territory in the eastern Amazon region.

He has often stated support for farmers and loggers working in the area,
while criticising environmental campaigners and slashing the budget of
Brazil's environmental agency.

Paulo Paulino Guajajara - another activist seen here during a search for
illegal loggers - was killed last November

More

The Guajajaras are one of Brazil's largest indigenous groups with some
20,000 people. In 2012, they started the Guardians of the Forest to
protect the Arariboia Indigenous Territory.

It is not clear who killed Zezico Guajajara on Tuesday. Authorities say
they are investigating.

In a statement issued on Wednesday, indigenous leader Olimpio Guajajara
described him as "another fellow warrior - a man who defended life".

"We are mourning his death. We're protecting the forest for all
humanity, but powerful forces are out to kill us."

The Brazilian Indigenous Peoples' Association (APIB) urged a thorough
investigation.

The latest murder "is evidence of the worsening violence and
vulnerability of the indigenous people, especially the leaders that
fight to defend their territories against invaders," the group said in a
statement.

Sarah Shenker, who works for Survival International, a non-governmental
organisation advocating for indigenous communities, accused loggers of
targeting activists "one by one".

The group renewed its criticism of President Bolsonaro.

"The Guardians have been mercilessly targeted by powerful logging mafias
illegally exploiting the valuable hardwoods in the Arariboia indigenous
territory, home to both the Guajajara indigenous people and uncontacted
members of the Awa tribe," it said in a statement.