---
title: "Coronavirus poses special risk to millions of Americans with diabetes"
date: "2020-04-02T1939"
hero: "http://l.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/tpBzrDjZgSmSqTJhunyrNg--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media-mbst-pub-ue1.s3.amazonaws.com/creatr-uploaded-images/2020-04/0303e300-7519-11ea-adbe-d95ce63c3cb2"
---
[ ][1]

[][1]

As the worsening coronavirus pandemic continues to spread across the
country, millions of Americans living with diabetes face heightened
risks from COVID-19.

Around 30 million Americans have diabetes, mostly of the type II
(previously called “adult-onset”) variety. A quarter of U.S. adults with
diabetes are over 65, an age that has been shown to delineate increased
COVID-19 mortality rates.

“One issue is you have the confounding factor of age. As people age,
type II diabetes becomes more and more prevalent,” Dr. Mark Snyder, an
endocrinologist in San Francisco, told Yahoo News. “It’s hard to tease
out all of these issues. Aging is also a risk factor for complications
with COVID-19.”

Diabetes is a disease of the pancreas that impairs the body’s ability to
process blood glucose. When left untreated, high blood sugar levels can
lead to a variety of life-threatening complications, such as heart
disease, kidney failure and stroke.

COVID-19 is especially worrisome for older diabetics, who may already be
suffering from heart disease, another risk factor for those who contract
the virus.

“Diabetes and high glucose levels are associated with increased
complications, respiratory failure and mortality in hospitalized
patients with COVID-19,” the American Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists states on its website.

Data compiled on the 2,112 [U.S. deaths from COVID-19][2] through March
28 showed 10.9 percent had diabetes, the most frequent underlying health
condition among those who had died. Still, health experts caution that
more still needs to be learned about the link between diabetes and
COVID-19.

“There is not enough data to show whether people with diabetes are more
likely to get COVID-19 than the general population,” the American
Diabetes Association says [on its website][3]. “The problem people with
diabetes face is primarily a problem with worse outcomes, not greater
chance of contracting the virus.”

In China, where the virus is believed to have originated, the data does
show that people with diabetes had much higher rates of serious
complications and death from COVID-19 than people without it, the ADA
reported.

The complications from viruses pose a heightened risk for diabetics,
which is why they are encouraged by doctors to receive a flu shot every
year. Roughly 30 percent of the adults hospitalized with influenza each
year have diabetes, according to the CDC.

“People with high blood sugar from diabetes can be more severely
affected by common infections, such as influenza and pneumonia,” the
University of Michigan wrote on its website. “This is why immunizations
for influenza (the flu) and pneumococcal disease are recommended for
people who have diabetes.”

Given that initial data shows COVID-19 is three times more infectious
than the seasonal flu, diabetics should take extra precautions, health
officials warn.

“If you do get one of these common illnesses, your diabetes is going to
be messed up and you’re likely going to end up in the hospital,” Snyder
said.

In part that’s because viral infections in diabetic patients greatly
increase the risk of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), a condition that
occurs when cells don’t receive sufficient glucose. It can lead to coma
and death.

“DKA can make it challenging to manage your fluid intake and electrolyte
levels — which is important in managing sepsis. Sepsis and septic shock
are some of the more serious complications that some people with
COVID-19 have experienced.”

 _____

[ _Click here_][4] _for the_[ _latest coronavirus news and updates_][5]
_. According to experts, people over 60 and those who are
immunocompromised continue to be the most at risk. If you have
questions, please reference the_[ _CDC_][6] _and_[ _WHO’s_][7] _resource
guides._

 **Read more:**

  
  
  
  

   [1]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus
   [2]: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6913e2.htm
   [3]: https://www.diabetes.org/covid-19-faq
   [4]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus-covid-19-news-and-live-updates-120246923.html
   [5]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus/
   [6]: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/summary.html
   [7]: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019