---
title: "Norway pleads for more aid to help Palestinians tackle coronavirus"
date: "2020-04-03T1355"
hero: ""
---
By Gwladys Fouche

OSLO (Reuters) - Norway called on Friday for more money to help the
Palestinian Territories get through the COVID-19 pandemic.

Although there has only been one death and 161 reported cases of the
coronavirus in the Palestinian Territories, the outbreak is expected to
worsen there.

Globally cases have now passed 1 million, with more than 53,000
fatalities, with most in the United States, Italy and Spain after the
initial outbreak in Asia.

"We need to work together to prevent this from being a bigger
humanitarian and health disaster than we think it can be, especially in
Gaza, but also in the West Bank," Norway's Foreign Minister Ine Eriksen
Soereide told Reuters.

"We are urging donors to step up their efforts both through the World
Bank and also directly to the Palestinians," she said.

Norway chairs the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee (AHLC), which is the donor
group to the Palestinians.

The Palestinian Authority estimates it needs $120 million to respond to
the coronavirus outbreak, but Soereide expects the needs to grow and the
measures already taken to limit the spread to hit the Palestinian
economy and budget.

She urged donors to deliver on previous commitments, including to the
United Nations and non-governmental organisations, and step up their
efforts.

Concerns are particularly high in the West Bank's crowded refugee camps
and the densely populated Gaza Strip, where Palestinian groups have
cancelled mass rallies on the border with Israel.

Soereide said there had been positive Israeli-Palestinian cooperation in
tackling the coronavirus pandemic.

However, she did not expect that the United States would resume funding
to the United Nations' Palestinian aid agency, or to the Palestinian
Authority, which it suspended in 2018.

"We have been urging them to do so for a long time ... we do not
necessarily expect there will be a change in the American line in the
short-term," Soereide said.

  

(Reporting by Gwladys Fouche; Editing by Alexander Smith)