---
title: "'We are on the verge of a massive collapse': Ex-Energy Secretary Perry says COVID-19 will ravage oil industry"
date: "2020-04-01T2353"
hero: "http://l.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/2lNk7EzYWOKu53necEHuKQ--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-us/usa_today_news_641/48fcd5a1af8a8b8be3548d9196406c63"
---
Former Energy Secretary Rick Perry believes that the oil industry could
collapse because of the dramatic decrease in demand worldwide caused by
the coronavirus outbreak and a steep decline in prices.

"Our capacity is full. The Saudis are flooding this market with cheap
oil," Perry told Fox News host Tucker Carlson on Tuesday night. "I'm
telling you, we are on the verge of a massive collapse of an industry
that we worked awfully hard, over the course of the last three or four
years, to build up to the number one oil and gas producing country in
the world, giving Americans some affordable energy resources."

Many U.S. states and countries around the world have ordered their
citizens to stay home in order to contain the spread of the virus. And
airlines have [dramatically cut back on flights][1] as the number of
passengers has fallen off. Fewer cars on the road and planes in the sky
means far less demand for oil.

Coupled with a dispute between Saudi Arabia and Russia that has resulted
in an oil surplus, the price for crude as well as gasoline has plunged.
The national average for gas in the U.S. is now [below $2 a gallon][2].

Perry, a former governor of oil-producing Texas, said that could destroy
smaller, independent companies and hurt the people who depend on them
for jobs.

"There's this host of Americans who their entire future – taking care of
their family paying their mortgages – is tied directly to the energy
industry," Perry said. "It's a driver of a massive amount of our
American economy."

And he said the loss of those smaller companies would have long term
consequences for the American consumer.

"If we woke up a year from now, and there were five big companies
because all of these independents were gone out of business ... I would
suggest that would make a lot of Americans really nervous," he said.

 **Want to talk more about politics?:**[Join our Facebook group: ‘Across
the Aisle, Across the Nation.’][3]

Perry's concerns appeared prescient Wednesday after the Whiting
Petroleum Corporation announced it was [filing for Chapter 11][4]
bankruptcy. In announcing the decision, CEO Bradley Holly cited "the
severe downturn in oil and gas prices driven by uncertainty around the
duration of the Saudi / Russia oil price war and the COVID-19 pandemic."

As one measure to address the crisis, Perry said that he would advise
President Donald Trump to tell refineries to only use U.S. crude oil for
60 to 90 days.

Perry said that would "give a buffer to the market" and "send a clear
message that we're just not going to let foreign oil flow in here" and
"bust our oil industry."

U.S. national security is at stake, Perry said.

"If our independent operators – who have led the shale revolution, who
have made America the number one gas-producing country in the world – if
we lose that, we'd go back to 1974," Perry said. "I remember what that
was like, where we were beholden to countries that didn't necessarily
have our best interests in mind."

Perry also suggested that the Treasury Department should buy up oil
futures to help buoy the industry.

Perry was one of the longest-serving members of Trump Cabinet before he
[resigned in October][5] amid scrutiny of his role in the Ukraine
scandal that led to Trump's impeachment.

 **'God's used imperfect people':**[Perry shares why he thinks Trump is
the 'chosen one'][6]

 _Contributing: Nathan Bomey_

 _This article originally appeared on USA TODAY:[Coronavirus has oil
industry near 'massive collapse,' Rick Perry says][7]_

   [1]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/travel/airline-news/2020/03/31/coronavirus-us-crisis-why-airlines-still-flying/2918233001/
   [2]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/money/2020/03/31/gas-prices-coronavirus-covid-19-crude-oil-prices/5093966002/
   [3]: https://www.facebook.com/groups/acrosstheaisleacrossthenation
   [4]: http://whiting.com/investor-relations/press-releases/
   [5]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2019/10/17/rick-perry-resigns-trumps-energy-secretary-amid-ukraine-probe/4012381002/
   [6]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2019/11/25/rick-perry-trump-gods-chosen-one/4295185002/
   [7]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/04/01/rick-perry-coronavirus-oil-industry-near-collapse/5102155002/