---
title: "Coronavirus live updates: US toll tops 5,100 after deadliest day yet; Florida, 3 other states issue stay-at-home orders; CDC considers masks"
date: "2020-04-02T0513"
hero: "http://l2.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/9kj.x_uwgTLwjn9AVr_Kvw--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-us/usa_today_news_641/c0f2ddd1e7f90695c2ddedef3d09ff88"
---
"Even if you do wear a mask, it can't be at the expense of social
distancing," Surgeon General Jerome Adams said. He added that the
higher-end N95 masks would not be necessary – and could come at the
expense of health care workers who need them.

Worldwide, there are more than 47,000 deaths and more than 935,000
confirmed cases. The U.S. has surpassed China’s death toll and more than
doubled its official count for confirmed cases, according to the [Johns
Hopkins University data][1] dashboard.

Wednesday's deaths — 1,040 as of 10:25 p.m. EDT — due to the coronavirus
mark the nation's highest mortality figure in any day and represent a
major increase over Tuesday's total of 504. Health experts predict that
the virus will not hit its peak in the U.S. for about another two weeks.

More than 215,000 people in the U.S. have tested positive for the
coronavirus as of Wednesday, doubling the number of cases from just five
days ago.

Health officials warn that the number of confirmed cases is expected to
continue to rise in the coming days as private and public health labs
ramp up testing across the nation. More than 1.1 million tests have been
completed, Vice President Mike Pence said Tuesday evening.

Most of the confirmed cases are in New York, where more than 83,000
people have tested positive for the virus, including more than 47,000 in
New York City, [according to the state health department][2].

DeSantis had previously resisted issuing a stay-at-home order but said
Wednesday he decided to issue the mandate when President Donald Trump
extended the national social distancing guidelines for an additional 30
days.

"You have them going, in some cases, from hot spot to hot spot," Trump
said about commercial planes.

But Trump added that he's aware of the hardship additional restrictions
would impose on air carriers. "Once you do that, you are clamping down
on an industry that is desperately needed," Trump said.

Airlines have drastically reduced flight schedules in the face of
plummeting passenger volume between cities. Trump has also imposed a ban
on foreign nationals visiting the U.S. from China and most of Europe. He
also has imposed restrictions on non-essential travel from Mexico and
Canada.

The University of California system became the largest and most
influential entity to waive its requirement that prospective students
entering college in 2021 submit scores from the SAT or ACT standardized
tests.

A growing number of colleges have used those cancellations as the
impetus to make the tests optional for incoming students, either
temporarily or for the foreseeable future. The UC system has been
discussing that possibility for some time.

 _– Chrissie Thompson_

## New study finds presymptomatic transmission of COVID-19

A [study published by the CDC on Wednesday][3] provided more evidence
that the coronavirus can spread between people before the infected
person knows they’re sick.

Researchers reviewed data for 243 reported COVID-19 cases in Singapore
from January 23 to March 16 and found that presymptomatic transmission
accounted for about 6.4% of locally acquired cases. The transmission
occurred one to three days before patients began experiencing symptoms.

“The possibility of presymptomatic transmission increases the challenges
of containment measures,” the study said. “The potential for
presymptomatic transmission underscores the importance of social
distancing, including the avoidance of congregate settings, to reduce
COVID-19 spread.”

[An earlier study in China suggested][4] that 12.6% of transmission was
presymptomatic.

 _– Grace Hauck_

## New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo: Deaths will hit 'apex' at end of April

New York state's death toll from the coronavirus continued its sharp
ascent with 391 people dying the in latest 24-hour period, New York Gov.
Andrew Cuomo said. The virus has killed nearly 2,000 in the state,
almost half the U.S. total.

“That number will continue to go up,” Cuomo said. “That is people who
have been on ventilators for a period of time. If you go on a
ventilator, there’s roughly only a 20% chance that you will come off the
ventilator. The longer you’re on the ventilator, the lower the chance
you’ll come off.”

Cuomo also said there were 83,712 confirmed cases as of Wednesday
afternoon, an increase of 7,917. Models indicate the apex of the
coronavirus outbreak in the state will hit “roughly at the end of April,
which means another month of this," Cuomo said. He added that the model
could change over time.

Cuomo showed one projection, from the Gates Foundation, that estimated
93,000 U.S. deaths, including 16,000 in New York state. “What that does
say to the rest of the nation is that this is not just New York,” Cuomo
said.

## CDC to review whether more people should wear face masks

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention will [review its guidance
discouraging the general public from wearing masks][5], Surgeon General
Jerome Adams said Wednesday on ABC's Good Morning America.

“We’ve learned there’s a fair amount of asymptomatic spread, and so
we’ve asked the CDC to take another look at whether or not having more
people wear masks will prevent transmission of the disease to other
people,” Adams said. The CDC's current guidance is that sick people
should wear masks, but healthy people should not unless they are in
contact with COVID-19 patients.

Health officials have said that masks don't necessarily protect the user
from getting the virus, but they prevent the spread to other people.

Dr. Anthony Fauci, head of the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, told CNN’s ["Coronavirus: Fact vs. Fiction with Dr.
Sanjay Gupta"][6] podcast that he supports the public donning masks as
long as health care workers are the first priority: "I would lean toward
it because, I mean, what harm can it do if you have enough masks?"

 _– Nicholas Wu_

## Las Vegas airport shuts down all gates at two concourses amid travel
decline

McCarran International Airport has shut down all gates at two concourses
[in response to declined air traffic][7] during the COVID-19 pandemic.

“As passenger activity has declined, McCarran officials are continually
evaluating the airport’s infrastructure and operations to identify ways
to maximize efficiencies and implement cost-savings measures,” officials
said in a news release Wednesday.

In the process of consolidating operations, the Department of Aviation
has also reduced its on-site workforce.

 _– Reno Gazette Journal_

## US stocks continue slide

U.S. stocks, fresh off one of the worst quarters in history, [fell
sharply when the markets opened][8] Wednesday as the Dow dropped more
than 800 points. The decline comes a day after the blue-chip index
posted its worst first quarter ever.

The Standard & Poor’s 500 also sank Wednesday: 10 of the 11 sectors were
lower, led by declines in financial, real estate and utility shares. The
losses come as President Donald Trump warned Americans to brace for a
“hell of a bad two weeks” ahead.

Said Anwiti Bahuguna, head of multi-asset strategy at Columbia
Threadneedle Investments: “What we are experiencing now is the
equivalent of putting a patient in a medically induced coma – a
calculated, temporary risk with the goal of establishing greater longer-
term health.”

 _– Jessica Menton_

## Some Hobby Lobby stores staying open in defiance of state orders

Hobby Lobby is keeping some of its stores open in[ defiance of state
shelter-in-place orders][9] while some locations are being forced to
close, according to media reports.

As businesses across the nation grapple with differences in how states
define "essential" businesses or retailers, Hobby Lobby and its
competitors Michaels and JOANN have kept many locations open with
limited hours.

But some Hobby Lobby locations in Ohio, Indiana, Wisconsin and Colorado
were shut down by law enforcement after reopening, defying the orders.

Hobby Lobby did not respond to USA TODAY's request  for comment.

 _– Kelly Tyko_

## Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis will allow residents to disembark cruise
ships

Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis said his state is [willing to accept its
residents ][10]who are on board two cruise ships seeking to disembark in
Florida after more than 190 guests and crew reported flu-like symptoms,
including eight passengers who tested positive for COVID-19.

Florida officials, DeSantis said, are "working on a solution" to
disembark other passengers, including foreign nationals, in a way that
does not drain resources in South Florida, the state’s epicenter of
COVID-19 cases.

"My concern is that we have worked so hard to make sure we have adequate
hospital space in the event of a COVID-19 surge, we wouldn't want those
valuable beds to be taken because of the cruise ship(s)," DeSantis said.

There are 24 guests from Florida on the MS Zaandam and 25 guests from
Florida on the MS Rotterdam. On Friday, asymptomatic passengers from the
Zaandam were transferred to the Rotterdam, which is also seeking to dock
in Florida. The ships, currently carrying a total of 1,200 passengers
including 304 Americans, are set to arrive in Fort Lauderdale early
Thursday.

 _– Andrea Mandell_

## Wimbledon tennis tourney canceled for first time since World War II

In a move that had been signaled strongly over the last week, [the All
England Club officially canceled Wimbledon for 2020][11], citing the
"likely trajectory" of the coronavirus outbreak in the United Kingdom
and the logistical impossibility of setting up the event at a point
later in the summer.

It will be the first time Wimbledon hasn't crowned a champion since the
tennis tournament paused from 1940 to 1945 because of World War II.

 _– Dan Wolken_

## Latest coronavirus headlines from USA TODAY

## Vice President Mike Pence likens US coronavirus situation to Italy

Vice President Mike Pence said on CNN that Italy "may be the most
comparable area to the United States" in terms of coronavirus mortality
rates and cases. He was responding to a question about the
administration's projection that 100,000 to 240,000 Americans could die
from COVID-19.

Italy currently has the world's largest number of coronavirus deaths
with more than 13,000, including 837 Tuesday alone, and trails only the
U.S. in the number of cases at more than 110,000. However, Italian
health officials say they believe the death curve may have peaked.

The U.S. has more than 206,000 cases and more than 4,600 deaths as of
Wednesday afternoon.

Pence painted a fairly optimistic outlook when he said, "By sometime in
early June, we could well have the coronavirus largely behind us as a
nation, and put Americans back to work."

 _– Nicholas Wu_

## Italy's death rate slows down

Though Italy has reported the most coronavirus-related deaths of any
country in the world with 13,155, a decline in the daily death rate may
suggest that the country’s outbreak is waning.

According to the country’s [civil protection agency][12], Italy reported
727 new deaths Wednesday. That marked a decrease of 110 – or 13.1% –
from Tuesday’s figure of 837. Wednesday’s new death figure was the
lowest since March 25, when 662 new deaths were reported.

“The curve tells us that we’re at a plateau,” said Silvio Brusaferro,
president of the country’s National Health Institute, according to [The
Guardian][13]. “That doesn’t mean we’ve hit the peak and that it’s over,
but that we must start the descent … by applying the measures in force.”

Italy has been under a national lockdown since March 9, and on Wednesday
health minister Roberto Speranza said the restrictions would be extended
until April 13.

Spain and the United Kingdom suffered their deadliest days yet
Wednesday. [Spain’s Ministry of Health announced 864][14] new deaths and
[Public Health England reported 563][15].

 _– Lorenzo Reyes_

## Companies trim 401(k) contributions

More corporations are [looking to temporarily halt 401(k)
contributions][16], trying to cut costs as the coronavirus crisis hits
their revenue and profits, labor attorneys said.

It's another way companies are trying to contain mounting losses, along
with millions of layoffs and employee furloughs. For workers, those
moves put a big dent in family budgets and retirement plans, which are
already battered by the stock market's plunge.

Joy Napier-Joyce, head of the employee benefits practice at the law firm
Jackson Lewis, said calls about canceling 401(k) matching ramped up over
the past two weeks.

"In anticipation of an economic downturn, employers are looking at the
ability to suspend those contributions for this year, or the near
future, to help with expenses," Napier-Joyce said.

 _– Dalvin Brown_

## Prince Charles is 'on the other side' of his coronavirus diagnosis

Prince Charles, who tested positive last week for COVID-19 after
"displaying mild symptoms," said in a video announcement shared by
Clarence House that [he is feeling better][17] but will stay in
isolation.

"Having recently gone through the process of contracting this
coronavirus, luckily with relatively mild symptoms, I now find myself on
the other side of the illness but still in no less a state of social
distance and general isolation," Charles said.

The 71-year-old son of Queen Elizabeth II expressed condolences to the
sick and the families of those who have died. His wife, Camilla, 72,
tested negative for the virus.

 _– Hannah Yasharoff_

## More coronavirus news and information from USA TODAY

 _This article originally appeared on USA TODAY:[Coronavirus update: US
deaths over 5,000, CDC considers face masks][18]_

   [1]: https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html
   [2]: https://coronavirus.health.ny.gov/county-county-breakdown-positive-cases
   [3]: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6914e1.htm?s_cid=mm6914e1_x
   [4]: https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/26/6/20-0357_article
   [5]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/04/01/coronavirus-surgeon-general-says-cdc-asked-review-mask-guidance/5101884002/
   [6]: https://www.cnn.com/audio/podcasts/corona-virus
   [7]: https://bit.ly/2wLmsYk
   [8]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/money/2020/04/01/dow-markets-death-toll-coronavirus-surges/5101974002/
   [9]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/money/2020/04/01/coronavirus-essential-business-hobby-lobby-closings/5104667002/
   [10]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/travel/cruises/2020/04/01/coronavirus-thousands-carnival-passengers-sea-holland-america-florida/5101845002/
   [11]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/tennis/2020/04/01/wimbledon-all-england-club-canceled-2020-coronavirus-outbreak-uk/5103196002/
   [12]: http://opendatadpc.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/b0c68bce2cce478eaac82fe38d4138b1
   [13]: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/01/italy-extends-lockdown-amid-signs-coronavirus-infection-rate-is-easing
   [14]: https://covid19.isciii.es/
   [15]: https://www.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/f94c3c90da5b4e9f9a0b19484dd4bb14
   [16]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/money/2020/04/01/coronavirus-floundering-companies-look-cut-401-k-contributions/5103046002/
   [17]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/entertainment/celebrities/2020/04/01/prince-charles-talks-coronavirus-health-update-covid-19/5101931002/
   [18]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/health/2020/04/01/coronavirus-live-updates-cuomo-us-deaths-navy-guam-new-york-city/5097019002/