---
title: "The Trail Leading Back to the Wuhan Labs"
date: "2020-04-03T1720"
hero: "http://l1.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/UqJaEURxmRfdS_Cjay5VGA--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-US/the_national_review_738/362584b7d8aab9fb44ec0dfc5348a5df"
---
Tye contends that that posting meant, “we’ve discovered a new and
terrible virus, and would like to recruit people to come deal with it.”
He also contends that “news didn’t come out about coronavirus until ages
after that.” Doctors in Wuhan [knew that they were dealing with a
cluster of pneumonia cases as December progressed][1], but it is
accurate to say that a very limited number of people knew about this
particular strain of coronavirus and its severity at the time of that
job posting. By December 31, about three weeks after doctors first
noticed the cases, the Chinese government notified the World Health
Organization and the [first media reports][2] about a “mystery
pneumonia” appeared outside China.

Some scientists aren’t convinced that the virus jumped straight from
bats to human beings, but [there are a few problems with the theory that
some other animal was an intermediate transmitter of COVID-19][3] from
bats to humans:

> Analyses of the  _SARS_ -CoV-2 genome indicate a single spillover
event, meaning the virus jumped only once from an animal to a person,
which makes it likely that the virus was circulating among people before
December. Unless more information about the animals at the Wuhan market
is released, the transmission chain may never be clear. There are,
however, numerous possibilities. A bat hunter or a wildlife trafficker
might have brought the virus to the market. Pangolins happen to carry a
coronavirus, which they might have picked up from bats years ago, and
which is, in one crucial part of its genome, virtually identical to
_SARS_ -CoV-2. But no one has yet found evidence that pangolins were at
the Wuhan market, or even that venders there trafficked pangolins.

On February 4 — one week before the World Health Organization [decided
to officially name this virus “COVID-19”][4] — [the journal _Cell
Research_][5] posted a notice written by scientists at the Wuhan
Institute of Virology about the virus, concluding, “our findings reveal
that remdesivir and chloroquine are highly effective in the control of
2019-nCoV infection in vitro. Since these compounds have been used in
human patients with a safety track record and shown to be effective
against various ailments, we suggest that they should be assessed in
human patients suffering from the novel coronavirus disease.” One of the
authors of that notice was the “bat woman,” Shi Zhengli.

In his YouTube video, Tye focuses his attention on a [researcher at the
Wuhan Institute of Virology][6] named Huang Yanling: “Most people
believe her to be patient zero, and most people believe she is dead.”

There was enough discussion of rumors about Huang Yanling online in
China to [spur an official denial][7]. On February 16, the Wuhan
Institute of Virology denied that patient zero was one of their
employees, and interestingly named her specifically: “Recently there has
been fake information about Huang Yanling, a graduate from our
institute, claiming that she was patient zero in the novel coronavirus.”
[Press accounts quote the institute as saying][8], “Huang was a graduate
student at the institute until 2015, when she left the province and had
not returned since. Huang was in good health and had not been diagnosed
with disease, it added.” None of her publicly available [research
papers][6] are dated after 2015.

The [web page for the Wuhan Institute of Virology’s Lab of Diagnostic
Microbiology][9] does indeed still have “Huang Yanling” listed as a 2012
graduate student, and her picture and biography appear to have been
recently removed — as have those of two other graduate students from
2013, Wang Mengyue and Wei Cuihua.

Her name still has a hyperlink, [but the linked page is blank][10]. The
pages for Wang Mengyue and Wei Cuihua are blank as well.

(For what it is worth, the _South China Morning Post_ — a newspaper seen
[as being generally pro-Beijing][11] — [reported on March 13][12] that
“according to the government data seen by the Post, a 55 year-old from
Hubei province could have been the first person to have contracted
Covid-19 on November 17.”)

On February 17, Zhen Shuji, a Hong Kong correspondent [from the French public-radio service Radio France Internationale, reported][13]: “when a reporter from the Beijing News of the Mainland asked the institute for rumors about patient zero, the institute first denied that there was a researcher Huang Yanling, but after learning that the name of the person on the Internet did exist, acknowledged that the person had worked at the firm but has now left the office and is unaccounted for.”

Tye says, “everyone on the Chinese internet is searching for [Huang
Yanling] but most believe that her body was quickly cremated and the
people working at the crematorium were perhaps infected as they were not
given any information about the virus.” (The U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention says that [handling the body of someone who has
died of coronavirus is safe][14] — including embalming and cremation —
as long as the standard safety protocols for handing a decedent are
used. It’s anyone’s guess as to whether those safety protocols were
sufficiently used in China before the outbreak’s scope was known.)

As Tye observes, a public appearance by Huang Yanling would dispel a lot
of the public rumors, and is the sort of thing the Chinese government
would quickly arrange in normal circumstances — presuming that Huang
Yanling was still alive. Several officials at the Wuhan Institute of
Virology issued public statements that Huang was in good health and that
no one at the institute has been infected with COVID-19. In any case,
the mystery around Huang Yanling may be moot, but it does point to the
lab covering up something about her.

China Global Television Network, a state-owned television broadcaster,
[illuminated another rumor][15] while attempting to dispel it in a
February 23 report entitled “Rumors Stop With the Wise”:

> On February 17, a Weibo user who claimed herself to be Chen Quanjiao,
a researcher at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, reported to the public
that the Director of the Institute was responsible for leaking the novel
coronavirus. The Weibo post threw a bomb in the cyberspace and the
public was shocked. Soon Chen herself stepped out and declared that she
had never released any report information and expressed great
indignation at such identity fraud on Weibo. It has been confirmed that
that particular Weibo account had been shut down several times due to
the spread of misinformation about COVID-19.

That Radio France Internationale report on February 17 also mentioned
the next key part of the Tye’s YouTube video. “Xiaobo Tao, a scholar
from South China University of Technology, recently published a report
that researchers at Wuhan Virus Laboratory were splashed with bat blood
and urine, and then quarantined for 14 days.” HK01, another Hong Kong-
based news site, [reported the same claim][16].

This doctor’s name is spelled in English as both “Xiaobo Tao” and “Botao
Xiao.” From 2011 to 2013, Botao Xiao was a [postdoctoral research fellow
at Harvard Medical School and Boston Children’s Hospital][17], and his
[biography is still on the web site of the South China University of
Technology.][17]

At some point in February, Botao Xiao posted a research paper onto
ResearchGate.net, “[The Possible Origins of 2019-nCoV coronavirus.”][18]
He is listed as one author, along with Lei Xiao from Tian You Hospital,
which is [affiliated with the Wuhan University of Science and
Technology][19]. The paper was removed a short time after it was posted,
but archived images of its pages can be found [here][18] and [here][20].

The first conclusion of Botao Xiao’s paper is that the bats suspected of
carrying the virus are extremely unlikely to be found naturally in the
city, and despite the stories of “bat soup,” they conclude that bats
were not sold at the market and were unlikely to be deliberately
ingested.

> The bats carrying CoV ZC45 were originally found in Yunnan or Zhejiang
province, both of which were more than 900 kilometers away from the
seafood market. Bats were normally found to live in caves and trees. But
the seafood market is in a densely-populated district of Wuhan, a
metropolitan [area] of ~15 million people. The probability was very low
for the bats to fly to the market. According to municipal reports and
the testimonies of 31 residents and 28 visitors, the bat was never a
food source in the city, and no bat was traded in the market.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health
Organization [could not confirm][21] if bats were present at the market.
Botao Xiao’s paper theorizes that the coronavirus originated from bats
being used for research at either one of two research laboratories in
Wuhan.

> We screened the area around the seafood market and identified two
laboratories conducting research on bat coronavirus. Within ~ 280 meters
from the market, there was the Wuhan Center for Disease Control &
Prevention. WHCDC hosted animals in laboratories for research purpose,
one of which was specialized in pathogens collection and identification.
In one of their studies, 155 bats including _Rhinolophus affinis_ were
captured in Hubei province, and other 450 bats were captured in Zhejiang
province. The expert in Collection was noted in the Author Contributions
(JHT). Moreover, he was broadcasted for collecting viruses on nation-
wide newspapers and websites in 2017 and 2019. He described that he was
once by attacked by bats and the blood of a bat shot on his skin. He
knew the extreme danger of the infection so he quarantined himself for
14 days. In another accident, he quarantined himself again because bats
peed on him.

>

> Surgery was performed on the caged animals and the tissue samples were
collected for DNA and RNA extraction and sequencing. The tissue samples
and contaminated trashes were source of pathogens. They were only ~280
meters from the seafood market. The WHCDC was also adjacent to the Union
Hospital (Figure 1, bottom) where the first group of doctors were
infected during this epidemic. It is plausible that the virus leaked
around and some of them contaminated the initial patients in this
epidemic, though solid proofs are needed in future study.

>

> The second laboratory was ~12 kilometers from the seafood market and
belonged to Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences . .
.

>

> In summary, somebody was entangled with the evolution of 2019-nCoV
coronavirus. In addition to origins of natural recombination and
intermediate host, the killer coronavirus probably originated from a
laboratory in Wuhan. Safety level may need to be reinforced in high risk
biohazardous laboratories. Regulations may be taken to relocate these
laboratories far away from city center and other densely populated
places.

However, Xiao has [told the _Wall Street Journal_ that he has withdrawn
his paper][22]. “The speculation about the possible origins in the post
was based on published papers and media, and was not supported by direct
proofs,” he said in a brief email on February 26.

The bat researcher that Xiao’s report refers to is virologist Tian
Junhua, who works at the Wuhan Centre for Disease Control. In 2004, the
World Health Organization determined that an outbreak of the SARS virus
had been caused by two separate leaks at the Chinese Institute of
Virology in Beijing. The Chinese government said that the leaks were a
result of “negligence” and the responsible officials had been punished.

In 2017, the Chinese state-owned Shanghai Media Group made a [seven-
minute documentary][23] about Tian Junhua, entitled “Youth in the Wild:
Invisible Defender.” Videographers followed Tian Junhua as he traveled
deep into caves to collect bats. “Among all known creatures, the bats
are rich with various viruses inside,” he says in Chinese. “You can find
most viruses responsible for human diseases, like rabies virus, SARS,
and Ebola. Accordingly, the caves frequented by bats became our main
battlefields.” He emphasizes, “bats usually live in caves humans can
hardly reach. Only in these places can we find the most ideal virus
vector samples.”

One of his last statements on the video is: “In the past ten-plus years,
we have visited every corner of Hubei Province. We explored dozens of
undeveloped caves and studied more than 300 types of virus vectors. But
I do hope these virus samples will only be preserved for scientific
research and will never be used in real life. Because humans need not
only the vaccines, but also the protection from the nature.”

The description of Tian Junhua’s self-isolation came from a May 2017 report by Xinhua News Agency, [repeated by the Chinese news site JQKNews.com][24]:

> The environment for collecting bat samples is extremely bad. There is
a stench in the bat cave. Bats carry a large number of viruses in their
bodies. If they are not careful, they are at risk of infection. But Tian
Junhua is not afraid to go to the mountain with his wife to catch
Batman.

>

> Tian Junhua summed up the experience that the most bats can be caught
by using the sky cannon and pulling the net. But in the process of
operation, Tian Junhua forgot to take protective measures. Bat urine
dripped on him like raindrops from the top. If he was infected, he could
not find any medicine. It was written in the report.

>

> The wings of bats carry sharp claws. When the big bats are caught by
bat tools, they can easily spray blood. Several times bat blood was
sprayed directly on Tians skin, but he didn’t flinch at all. After
returning home, Tian Junhua took the initiative to isolate for half a
month. As long as the incubation period of 14 days does not occur, he
will be lucky to escape, the report said.

Bat urine and blood can [carry][25] viruses. How likely is it that bat
urine or blood got onto a researcher at either Wuhan Center for Disease
Control & Prevention or the Wuhan Institute of Virology? Alternatively,
what are the odds that some sort of medical waste or other material from
the bats was not properly disposed of, and that was the initial
transmission vector to a human being?

Virologists have been [vehemently skeptical of the theory that COVID-19
was engineered or deliberately constructed in a laboratory][26]; the
director of the National Institutes of Health has [written][27] that
recent genomic research “debunks such claims by providing scientific
evidence that this novel coronavirus arose naturally.” And none of the
above is definitive proof that COVID-19 originated from a bat at either
the Wuhan Center for Disease Control & Prevention or the Wuhan Institute
of Virology. Definitive proof would require much broader access to
information about what happened in those facilities in the time period
before the epidemic in the city.

But it is a remarkable coincidence that the Wuhan Institute of Virology
was researching Ebola and SARS-associated coronaviruses in bats before
the pandemic outbreak, and that in the month when Wuhan doctors were
treating the first patients of COVID-19, the institute announced in a
hiring notice that “a large number of new bat and rodent new viruses
have been discovered and identified.” And the fact that the Chinese
government spent six weeks insisting that COVID-19 could not be spread
from person to person means that its denials about Wuhan laboratories
cannot be accepted without independent verification.

#### More from National Review

   [1]: https://www.nationalreview.com/the-morning-jolt/chinas-devastating-lies/
   [2]: https://www.scmp.com/news/china/politics/article/3044050/mystery-illness-hits-chinas-wuhan-city-nearly-30-hospitalised
   [3]: https://www.newyorker.com/science/elements/from-bats-to-human-lungs-the-evolution-of-a-coronavirus
   [4]: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/technical-guidance/naming-the-coronavirus-disease-(covid-2019)-and-the-virus-that-causes-it
   [5]: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41422-020-0282-0
   [6]: https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/2035568207_Yanling_Huang
   [7]: http://www.whiov.ac.cn/tzgg_105342/202002/t20200216_5500201.html
   [8]: https://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/3050872/chinese-research-lab-denies-rumours-links-first-coronavirus
   [9]: http://159.226.126.127:8082/web/17190/20
   [10]: http://159.226.126.127:8082/web/17190/46
   [11]: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/31/world/asia/south-china-morning-post-hong-kong-alibaba.html
   [12]: https://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/3074991/coronavirus-chinas-first-confirmed-covid-19-case-traced-back
   [13]: http://www.rfi.fr/cn/%E4%B8%AD%E5%9B%BD/20200217-%E6%AD%A6%E6%B1%89%E7%A0%94%E7%A9%B6%E6%89%80%E5%A4%96%E6%B3%84%E7%97%85%E6%AF%92%E4%BC%A0%E8%A8%80%E6%9C%AA%E6%AD%A2%E5%8F%88%E6%9C%89%E6%B6%88%E6%81%AF%E6%8C%87-%E9%9B%B6%E5%8F%B7%E7%97%85%E4%BA%BA-%E6%98%AF%E7%A0%94%E7%A9%B6%E5%91%98
   [14]: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/faq.html
   [15]: https://news.cgtn.com/news/2020-02-23/Rumors-stop-with-the-wise-OjMaO0RjGM/index.html
   [16]: https://www.hk01.com/%E7%A4%BE%E6%9C%83%E6%96%B0%E8%81%9E/435123/%E6%AD%A6%E6%BC%A2%E8%82%BA%E7%82%8E-%E6%AD%A6%E6%BC%A2%E7%96%BE%E6%8E%A7%E7%A0%94%E7%A9%B6%E5%93%A1%E6%9B%BE%E8%A2%AB%E8%9D%99%E8%9D%A0%E8%A5%B2%E6%93%8A-%E5%85%A7%E5%9C%B0%E5%AD%B8%E8%80%85%E8%B3%AA%E7%96%91%E7%97%85%E6%AF%92%E6%B4%A9%E6%BC%8F
   [17]: https://www2.scut.edu.cn/biology_en/2017/0614/c5951a169022/page.htm
   [18]: https://web.archive.org/web/20200214144447/https:/www.researchgate.net/publication/339070128_The_possible_origins_of_2019-nCoV_coronavirus
   [19]: https://www.wheto.gov.hk/filemanager/content/pdf/contact_information_public_private_hospitals_e.pdf
   [20]: https://www.zerohedge.com/health/smoking-gun-chinese-scientist-finds-killer-coronavirus-probably-originated-laboratory-wuhan
   [21]: https://www.wsj.com/articles/scientists-link-china-virus-to-intersection-of-humans-and-wildlife-11580997600
   [22]: https://www.wsj.com/articles/coronavirus-epidemic-draws-scrutiny-to-labs-handling-deadly-pathogens-11583349777
   [23]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ovnUyTRMERI&feature=emb_logo
   [24]: https://www.jqknews.com/news/393098-Latest_overseas_research_bats_carrying_new_coronavirus_may_directly_infect_people.html
   [25]: https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/02/200210144854.htm
   [26]: https://www.livescience.com/coronavirus-not-human-made-in-lab.html
   [27]: https://directorsblog.nih.gov/2020/03/26/genomic-research-points-to-natural-origin-of-covid-19/