---
title: "Exclusive: How elite U.S. college students brought COVID-19 home from campus"
date: "2020-04-02T2135"
hero: "http://l2.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/u88YzNxuy6hZXzNwuj2whA--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-US/reuters.com/8438b99c620fd37f8f0de9b6c992db28"
---
By Anna Irrera and Steve Stecklow

(Reuters) - Like many American colleges, Vanderbilt University in
Nashville announced last month it was closing its dormitories and
putting classes online because of the growing threat of coronavirus. It
said it was acting "out of an abundance of caution" after a local
healthcare worker had tested positive for the disease.

The message was lost on many students.

Before leaving campus and returning to their homes and families
throughout the United States and abroad, more than 100 Vanderbilt
students attended parties, ignoring the school's explicit instructions
not to do so. They crowded into apartment complexes and other locations,
and posed for group pictures they posted on Instagram. Many celebrated
St. Patrick's Day six days early - on the same day New York City
announced it was cancelling its traditional annual parade.

One photo of a March 11 party, posted on Instagram and seen by Reuters,
shows a student in a makeshift hazmat suit, a black mask and green
bowler hat with shamrocks, as a large group of students party in the
background. "I dare you to give me corona," reads the picture's caption.
The photo's location jokingly claims to be "Wuhan, China" -- the origin
of the global pandemic.

Some Vanderbilt students later learned they were infected with the
virus, known as COVID-19. A private online group of students who say
they have contracted coronavirus had 107 members this week, with most
stating they had mild or moderate symptoms, according to posts seen by
Reuters. Vanderbilt University Medical Center, an independent hospital
near the campus, also reported 86 employees have tested positive for
coronavirus to date, according to a spokeswoman.

The example of Vanderbilt - a prestigious, private research institution
in America's South - shows that risky behavior by some young people
extended far beyond the spring break mob scenes on Florida beaches that
emerged last month. It illustrates the role students at some colleges -
particularly those with a global footprint - have played in the
pandemic.

Other colleges have also reported coronavirus outbreaks. Forty-four
students at the University of Texas at Austin tested positive for the
disease after returning from spring break in Mexico, according to a
state university spokeswoman. In March, the University of Tampa said
five students traveling together during spring break had tested
positive.

In a statement, Vanderbilt said: "Just as for our peers around the
country, COVID-19 has created unprecedented challenges for our community
as we have sought, above all, to protect the health and safety of our
students, faculty and staff. Vanderbilt has regularly communicated with
our community about the essential steps the university is taking, and
that they must take, to limit the spread of disease."

The university declined to answer questions about how many students have
contracted coronavirus, citing federal student privacy law.

  

TRAVELS IN EUROPE

Vanderbilt began its spring break earlier than many schools. It took
place between Feb. 29 and March 8, a time in which the pandemic, which
began in China, was beginning to seriously affect Europe, but hadn't yet
significantly hit the United States.

"Vandy" is an elite school with a large cohort of well-to-do students.
Many travel abroad during spring break, especially Europe. They often
visit other Vanderbilt students attending study-abroad programs.

On Feb. 25, Vanderbilt warned students not to travel to China or South
Korea - two coronavirus hot spots - and to reconsider making non-
essential trips to other countries with serious outbreaks. International
students were advised not to leave the United States at all.

One country that hadn't yet reported many cases was Spain. Max Schulman,
a Vanderbilt junior, said he traveled to Barcelona with more than a
dozen classmates and estimated that about 50 Vanderbilt students in all
were there during spring break. Spain has since emerged as one of the
epicenters of the global outbreak.

Schulman said he felt tired, restless and "delirious" on his flight
back. Instead of returning to campus, he went to his family's home in
Long Island, New York, and later tested positive for coronavirus.

Other Vanderbilt students who traveled to Spain and other European
countries returned to the Nashville campus.

On March 8, an online petition started by Chinese first-year student
Yihan Li asked Vanderbilt to cancel classes to protect students' health,
as the number of infections in the Nashville area slowly rose. "There
have been two confirmed cases in Nashville and our students are
returning from all over the world after the spring break," the petition
stated. "It is at great risk to hold classes as normal." More than 2,000
people signed. Vanderbilt has about 12,000 full-time undergraduate and
graduate students, according to its website.

The same day, the university informed students that there were no
confirmed cases on campus. It also noted that an unidentified student
who had studied abroad but hadn't returned to Nashville had tested
positive. The announcement followed a story in the campus newspaper, the
Vanderbilt Hustler, that a student in a program in Italy had later
tested positive in Chicago.

Classes resumed on Monday, March 9. By the end of the day, the school
disclosed that several students on campus reported they had been exposed
to an unidentified individual who tested positive that day. It announced
it was cancelling classes for the rest of the week and would soon move
them online through March. The announcement added: "To be clear, the
university will remain open."

At the time, scores of other American colleges and universities were
taking steps to cancel classes and switch to online instruction,
according to data compiled by Bryan Alexander, a senior scholar at
Georgetown University.

A picture of Vanderbilt's announcement appeared on a satirical Instagram
account with this comment: "Let spring break pt. 2 begin." That night,
some students began partying to both commiserate and celebrate over the
end of classes, one student told Reuters.

On March 10, Vanderbilt issued a warning to campus residents: "There
should be no parties/gatherings; students are encouraged to maintain
social distance and minimize interactions with others." The college was
two days ahead of Nashville's mayor in urging social distancing.

Some seniors worried their college days were coming to an abrupt end and
the campus would soon clear out, students said. Their fears soon came
true: On March 11, Vanderbilt told students that a healthcare worker at
Vanderbilt University Medical Center had tested positive and classes
would go on line for the rest of the semester. Undergraduates living on
campus should leave within four days.

  

PARTY TIME

Planned St. Patrick's Day parties were moved up. The event is an annual
tradition for many Vanderbilt students, who refer to it as "St Fratty's"
because many parties are held at fraternity houses.

"We're all here and we're ready to fire one last time before our college
careers are ended" by coronavirus, stated one Facebook post announcing
an off-campus St Patrick's Day party. Several students who attended the
party later tested positive for coronavirus, according to a student.
Reuters could not independently confirm this.

Another "St Fratty's" celebration kicked off in the rooftop courtyard of
Wesley Place apartments, a residential complex that is home to third-
year and fourth-year students. Instagram pictures depict clusters of
students clad in green, chatting in close proximity, drinking from beer
cans and red cups, and posing together for pictures.

In one photo, a group of seven young women dressed in green huddle
together, hugging and holding hands. A photo collage posted by
Vanderbilt's chapter of the Kappa Kappa Gamma sorority showed small
groups of young, green-clad women smiling, hugging and posing for
pictures. The sorority didn't respond to a request for comment.

Following the Wesley Place party, students dispersed to other locations,
including off-campus fraternity houses and another apartment complex,
according to students and social media posts.

One video shows several dozen students in a backyard dancing, hugging
and drinking. Text overlaying the video reads, "Schools out forever,"
while the caption reads, "the luck of the Irish did not grace Vanderbilt
this st frattys."

That same day, March 11, three news developments smashed America's
complacency about the disease. President Donald Trump imposed a 30-day
ban on foreigners traveling from Europe, the National Basketball
Association suspended its season, and movie star Tom Hanks announced he
and his wife had tested positive for coronavirus in Australia.

Some Vanderbilt students soon were reporting in private chat groups that
they had contracted coronavirus.

A private group called "Covid Family" that consists of students who said
they had contracted the virus grew to 107 members. In one poll of 80
students, a dozen answered "yes" to whether they had coronavirus,
according to a screenshot. Reuters couldn't determine if the self-
reported diagnoses were accurate.

One infected student interviewed by Reuters attended off-campus parties
and experienced symptoms on March 15 after returning home. The student's
mother also developed mild symptoms. The student said the exact source
of the infection was impossible to know.

Sophia Yan, a first-year Vanderbilt student from China, told Reuters she
found out she had contracted coronavirus upon returning home to the
Chinese city of Shenzhen on March 17. She said she didn't attend any
parties on campus, leading her to suspect the virus was more widespread
at Vanderbilt than students and the administration realize.

She said she believes the university should have required students to
report all their travels during spring break and released information
about any who had tested positive, such as their whereabouts and what
classes they attended.

"Unfortunately, Vanderbilt's lack of effective measures largely reflects
how the United States as a whole is dealing with this crisis," she said.
"To combat this pandemic, U.S. federal and state governments, as well as
the American people, must recognize the severity and urgency of the
matter."

Vanderbilt didn't respond to a specific question about Yan's comments.

But it said because of federal student privacy law, "we are unable to
disclose widely within the Vanderbilt community personally identifiable
information about any student who has tested positive for COVID-19."

Netra Rastogi, a Vanderbilt sophomore, doesn't fault the administration.
"I don't think they realized that so many students at Vanderbilt
wouldn't take this whole situation seriously."

(reporting by Anna Irrera and Steve Stecklow; editing by Janet McBride)