---
title: "A national lockdown to stop coronavirus? Trump is 'thinking about doing that'"
date: "2020-04-02T0057"
hero: "http://l.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/zsFs0V8kgmKpsTHuYPkKBA--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media-mbst-pub-ue1.s3.amazonaws.com/creatr-uploaded-images/2020-04/bbcdb6a0-7478-11ea-bddf-161b2e37137f"
---
[ ][1]

[][1]

President Trump shied away Wednesday from issuing domestic travel
restrictions or a national lockdown to slow the spread of the
coronavirus pandemic that, in a best-case scenario, is expected to kill
between 100,000 and 240,000 Americans.

Asked at a White House briefing if he was considering limiting domestic
air travel, Trump said he was thinking about it, a phrase he frequently
applies to subjects he wishes to avoid discussing.

“We’re thinking about doing that, but at the same time we just, to start
these airlines and to start this whole thing over again is very tough,
John [Roberts, Fox News reporter]. It’s very tough,” Trump said. “And
you have them going, in some cases, from hot spot to hot spot, if you
noticed. Usually they’re hot spot to hot spot, very few flights, New
York to Miami. But we’re certainly looking at it, but once you do that,
you really are clamping down an industry that is desperately needed.”

The president did not rule out instituting further travel bans, saying
it was “a calculation that we’re looking at right now and we’re looking
at it very strongly,” but he began his briefing indicating that the peak
of the outbreak in the U.S. might soon be at hand.

“We’re going to have a couple of weeks starting pretty much now, but
especially a few days from now, that are going to be horrific,” Trump
said.

Asked why he had not issued a nationwide stay-at-home order to slow
transmission of the virus, Trump pointed to Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis’s
order on Wednesday for state residents there to shelter in place.

“States are different and I understand that the governor of Florida,
great governor, Ron DeSantis, issued one today and that’s good, that’s
great,” Trump said. “But there are some states that are different. There
are some states that don’t have much of a problem, well, they don’t have
the problem, they don’t have thousands of people that are positive or
thousands of people that think they might have it, or hundreds of people
in some cases.”

DeSantis has come under fire by critics who accuse him of being slow to
close beaches and order social distancing directives while the number of
COVID-19 cases rose to nearly 8,000 in the state. There have so far been
101 deaths there from the disease.

President Trump after a coronavirus briefing at the White House on
Wednesday. (Alex Brandon/AP)

More

But Trump continued to make his case that the ultimate call about
whether to limit freedom of movement was up to the states.

“You have to give a little bit of flexibility in the Midwest or Alaska,
for example, doesn’t have a problem. It’s hard to say, ‘close it down,’”
Trump said.

In fact, [Alaska Gov. Mike Dunleavy put a stay-at-home order in place
][2]on March 28. Alaska has [133 confirmed cases ][3]of COVID-19.

Over the past few days, Trump, who had said he hoped to have the country
back to normal by Easter Sunday (April 12), has reversed course and
extended the government’s voluntary social distancing recommendations
through the end of the month.

He said he had come to realize that COVID-19 is different than the
seasonal flu.

“It is so contagious,” Trump said when asked what had stopped likening
the coronavirus to flu. “Nobody has ever seen anything like this where
large groups of people all of a sudden, just by being in the presence of
somebody, have it. The flu has never been like that.”

The president also said that he had been approached by health
professionals who recommended a nationwide lockdown to stem infections.

“The professionals came to me and say, ‘Sir, you’re going to have to
shut the country down.’ I said, what does that mean?” Trump told
reporters at the briefing. “They said, ‘Sir, you’re going to have to
shut it down.’”

Dr. Anthony Fauci, the leading medical expert on the coronavirus task
force, offered a more sobering assessment of when social distancing
measures might be eased.

“I think if we get to the part of the curve that Dr. Birx showed
yesterday, when it goes down to essentially no new cases, no deaths at a
period of time, I think it makes sense that you’re going to have to
relax social distancing,” Fauci said.

As of Wednesday evening, over 213,000 Americans had tested positive for
COVID-19 and nearly 5,000 had died from it. Roughly 20 states have fewer
than 1,000 confirmed cases of the disease, but that list grows shorter
with nearly every passing day.

  

_____

[ _Click here_][4] _for the_[ _latest coronavirus news and updates_][5]
_. According to experts, people over 60 and those who are
immunocompromised continue to be the most at risk. If you have
questions, please reference the_[ _CDC_][6] _and_[ _WHO’s_][7] _resource
guides._

 **Read more:**

   [1]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus
   [2]: https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-stay-at-home-order.html
   [3]: http://dhss.alaska.gov/dph/Epi/id/Pages/COVID-19/default.aspx
   [4]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus-covid-19-news-and-live-updates-120246923.html
   [5]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus/
   [6]: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/summary.html
   [7]: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019