---
title: "Israel's ultra-Orthodox Jews in fight over virus rules"
date: 2020-03-31T1427
hero: "http://l2.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/3IKNtD9nlu19liHIKlFQeA--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/http://media.zenfs.com/en_us/News/afp.com/527b96049b6426bb2eb43f85ef76b8d7fcc2d3e5.jpg"
---
Jerusalem (AFP) - Israeli police with face masks and batons and backed
by surveillance helicopters have stepped up patrols of ultra-Orthodox
Jewish neighbourhoods that have become coronavirus hotspots.

This week has seen tense altercations, and some rabbis have admitted
that their communities, where prayer and scripture study are
traditionally communal, are not observing new social distancing
regulations.

A few days ago in Bnei Brak, a city near Tel Aviv with a largely ultra-
Orthodox population, hundreds of faithful crowded together to attend the
funeral of prominent rabbi Tzi Shenkar.

They flouted pandemic emergency rules limiting attendance at funerals to
20 people, who must keep a distance of at least two metres (six feet)
from one another.

The orders have closed places of worship of all faiths.

The mass funeral brought wide condemnation, including from some high-
profile members of the ultra-Orthodox community.

Eliyahu Sorkin, head of intensive care at Bnei Brak's Mayanei Yeshua
hospital and himself ultra-Orthodox, called the breach of health
regulations "criminal".

Influential rabbi Chaim Kanievsky condemned the mass event and Health
Minister Yaakov Litzman, also ultra-Orthodox, even said he had asked
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to impose a blockade on the city.

"The situation there is horrific," the minister said in an interview
with Israeli daily Yediot Aharonot.

"Every day there is fear of losing lives."

\- 'Missed the boat' -

The government was said to be considering the blockade request.

In Jerusalem, Chief Rabbi David Lau made a radio appeal to the observant
to "inform" the authorities of those they see breaking the rules.

Litzman's ministry has so far confirmed more than 4,800 cases of
COVID-19 infection nationwide since the first recorded instance in
Israel, in February.

Since then 17 people have died and more than 160 have recovered,
according to data released Tuesday.

Media reports say that half of the country's sick are ultra-Orthodox,
although they make up only around 10 percent of the population.

Bnei Brak, where the mayor himself tested positive for COVID-19, runs
second in the number of confirmed cases after Jerusalem.

The Holy City is the heart of the Orthodox world, centred round the
densely-populated Mea Sharim neighbourhood which has largely become a
no-go zone for outsiders.

There and in other ultra-Orthodox neighbourhoods, police helicopters
hover over lanes, courtyards and alleys, looking for men gathering for
outdoor prayer now that synagogues are locked down.

Police said officers on the ground had handed out fines to violators on
Monday.

Police in Mea Sharim arrested ultra-Orthodox men who protested the
closure of a synagogue there, an AFP photographer witnessed.

Video shows an officer briefing his squad to sweep the area and ensure
that all places of prayer were closed, while some objectors shouted
"Nazis".

Rabbi Henri Kahn told AFP that the ultra-Orthodox world had "missed the
boat" in anti-virus measures.

"We did not want to see," he said.

In Bnei Brak in particular, some synagogues and seminaries stayed open
well after the lockdown orders given by the authorities.

\- No TV, no internet -

Motti Ravid, director of the Mayanei Yeshua hospital there, expects a
sharp rise in the number of ultra-Orthodox who become infected.

He says that with internet and television prohibited in the community on
religious grounds, government directives took a long time to filter
through.

Even for those using mobile phones, access to the internet and most
instant messengers is blocked, shutting them off from the main means of
communication used now by the health ministry.

Kahn also said that the government measures directly clashed with Jewish
religious obligations, such as the requirement for every man to pray
three times a day in a synagogue with nine others.

Next week is the major Jewish holiday of Passover, a feast also known as
the festival of freedom which celebrates the biblical Exodus from Egypt.

At its centre is feasting and reciting blessings with the extended
family.

Many now wonder how to observe the ancient traditions at a time of
social distancing, while officials fear mass breaches of the safety
regulations.

As the holiday nears, said health ministry director general Moshe Bar
Siman Tov, "we are afraid that people will gather on Passover despite
the ongoing ban, and that the situation will worsen."