---
title: "Coronavirus live updates: Cloth masks in public now recommended; US death toll passes 7,100; nation lost 701K jobs in March"
date: "2020-04-04T0254"
hero: "http://l1.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/qnmiwEowC8h86f23RNwBOw--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-us/usa_today_news_641/202fefd05f9cdccb7a27bb49e8660e8c"
---
Health authorities changed their position Friday on the widespread use
of non-medical masks and federal emergency workers say they are working
around-the-clock to meet demand for medical supplies in an increasingly
deadly COVID-19 outbreak in New York.

"So it's voluntary, you don't have to do it," President Donald Trump
said of the recommendation for wearing masks. "I don't think I'm going
to be doing it."

Also Friday, a record streak of job growth in the United States ended as
the Labor Department said [over 700,000 jobs were lost][1] in March,
showing the widespread economic impacts of the growing coronavirus
pandemic.

The U.S. has now surpassed 7,100 deaths, with more than 1,100 on Friday
alone. The nation's daily death toll is predicted to steadily rise until
the virus peaks, roughly two weeks from now.

There were more than 275,000 confirmed coronavirus cases in the U.S. by
8 p.m. ET Friday, according to the [Johns Hopkins University data
dashboard][2]. Worldwide, the death toll topped 58,000 with nearly 1.1
million confirmed cases.

Surgeon General Jerome Adams detailed the new face covering
recommendations at Friday’s White House briefing, acknowledging the
evolving guidance has been “confusing to the American people.”

Adams stressed the new recommendation from the CDC and coronavirus task
force pertained to non-medical, [cloth face coverings][3] and do not
replace current social distancing guidance. The general public should
not begin wearing medical-grade equipment, Adams said, as such measures
should be reserved for the medical industry.

Officials have consistently recommended people showing symptoms of the
virus should wear protective masks, Adams said. Now authorities are
asking all people to wear cloth masks in public places like grocery
stores and pharmacies.

The updated guidance is spurred by new science showing a significant
number of people can spread the virus when they are not showing
symptoms.

“This is about me protecting you and you protecting me. This is about us
coming together as communities and if people voluntarily choose to wear
a face covering, they’re wearing it to protect their neighbors," Adams
said.

"I just don't want to wear one myself . . . I'm feeling good," Trump
said.

The unemployment rate rose to 4.4% from a 50-year low of 3.5%, the Labor
Department said Friday.

The report reflects employers’ jitters early in the month over the
unprecedented economic fallout from the pandemic. But it doesn’t capture
the nearly [10 million laid-off and furloughed Americans ][4]who filed
initial jobless claims the past two weeks as much of the nation’s
economy was shut down to help contain the spread of the virus.

That’s because Labor’s survey was conducted the week ending March 14,
before most states ordered residents to stay at home and nonessential
businesses – such as restaurants, movie theaters and most stores – to
close.

One staff member at the facility has died. State health officials are
awaiting the results of additional tests to determine the extent of the
coronavirus spread at the facility.

The state continues to investigate the infection control procedures at
the 116-bed hospital that provides mental health and addiction services
for children.

Since the outbreak, the hospital has implemented new procedures. It has
stopped taking new patients until at least April 15.

– Anjeanette Damon

## New York to send National Guard to seize ventilators

After New York's most deadly night due to the coronavirus, Gov. Andrew
Cuomo said Friday he will [call in the National Guard to take unused
ventilators][5] and supplies to redistribute them to the places of
greatest need.

New York had a shocking 562 deaths overnight – an average of 23 deaths
an hour – as the total number of deaths in the state due to COVID-19 hit
2,935, Cuomo announced.

In response, Cuomo said he will sign an executive order that will allow
the National Guard to go to hospitals and health-care facilities to take
unused ventilators and other medical supplies so they can be used in
parts of the state in desperate need of more resources.

"I’m not going to let people die because we didn’t redistribute
ventilators," Cuomo said

 _– Joseph Spector_

## TSA worker dies of COVID-19, becoming agency's first casualty

The Transportation Security Administration [has reported its first
COVID-19 casualty][6] after an explosive detection canine handler at
Newark Liberty International Airport died Thursday.

Francis “Frank” Boccabella III, 39, joined TSA in 2004. "He is the first
federal TSA employee who we have lost to COVID-19,"  the agency said in
a release posted to its website Friday. "The news of this loss
strengthens our determination to work ever more closely with our inter-
agency partners to stop the spread of COVID-19."

Boccabella, whose last day at work before becoming sick was March 19,
was one of five TSA officers from Newark and one of 74 TSA workers
across the country to contract COVID-19 in the past 14 days. (Out of
that number 56 are screening officers; another 18 have limited
interaction with the traveling public.)

Despite the fact that screening officers must come into close contact
with passengers to do their jobs, at least one sick officer says he's
been been denied a COVID-19 test three times.

 _– Jayme Deerwester_

## FEMA says it has sent millions of respirators and ventilators to
states

The Federal Emergency Management Agency said it’s exhausting all
resources to meet the demands of states seeking medical supplies to
treat the coronavirus, adding that the national stockpile alone can’t
fulfill the requests by state governments.

FEMA spokeswoman Janet Montesi said FEMA has delivered or sent states
millions of N-95 masks, surgical masks, face shields and hospital gowns
from the national stockpile.

As of April 2, the agency has shipped 11.6 million N-95 respirators,
26.3 million surgical masks, 5.2 million face shields and 8,100
ventilators, among other medical supplies.

Montesi also pointed to the agency's efforts to expedite supplies from
the global market, including a flight on March 29, which delivered 80
tons of equipment from Asia to New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
Additional flights landed in Chicago on March 30, Miami on March 31, Los
Angeles on April 1 as well as in Chicago and Columbus, Ohio, early
Friday.

FEMA has scheduled additional flights and is adding more daily, she
added.

 _\--Courtney Subramanian_

Medical staff of a mobile unit take samples from people in cars to test
for Covid-19 at a drive-through position at the Santa Maria della Pieta'
hospital complex, in Rome, Friday, April 3, 2020.

More

## Chicago’s temporary coronavirus facility ready with 500 beds

The [alternate care facility inside North America’s largest convention
center][7] had 500 beds and the corresponding medical staff ready to
accept coronavirus patients Friday, completing the first phase of an
ongoing build-out.

The 2.6-million-square-foot McCormick Place Convention Center in
downtown Chicago is expected to have 3,000 beds for COVID-19 patients
with mild symptoms by the end of the month.

“We shouldn’t have to beg the federal government to step up here and
assume its responsibility. When we hear from the head of the CDC that
the federal stockpile ... only has 10,000 ventilators. The question we
should ask is what the heck has the Trump administration been doing over
the last three and a half years?” Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot said at
an on-site press briefing Friday.

The facility currently has 14 nursing stations and support rooms for
medical supply storage, pharmacy and housekeeping services. Nearly 140
contracted medical personnel from Illinois and across the nation were
prepared to staff the first 500 beds, according to the governor’s
office.

“We all fervently hope that we will never have to take care of a patient
here ... but that’s very unlikely,” said Dr. Nick Turkal, former
Advocate Healthcare CEO and the new Executive Director of the McCormick
Place alternate care facility.The facility will receive patients from
hospital partners but will not accept walk-in patients, Turkal said.

Illinois on Friday announced more than 1,200 new coronavirus cases,
bringing the state’s total to nearly 9,000 confirmed cases, with 210
deaths.

 _– Grace Hauck_

## Google uses location data to track social distancing success

A new [tool from Google ][8]uses anonymized location data to calculate
which communities are reducing traffic in public places.

The Community Mobility Reports tool estimates the change in visits and
length of stay at retail and recreation locations, grocery and pharmacy
stores, parks, workplaces and other locations.

The regularly-updated data, shown as a percentage compared to a
baseline, is available for at least 130 countries and regions.

“In addition to other resources public health officials might have, we
hope these reports will help support decisions about how to manage the
COVID-19 pandemic,” reads a Friday Google blog post by executives Jen
Fitzpatrick and Karen DeSalvo.

“For example, this information could help officials understand changes
in essential trips that can shape recommendations on business hours or
inform delivery service offerings.”

The data comes from users who opted in to the Location History setting,
the blog post says. The company says it uses privacy tools to assure an
individual person's location remains anonymous.

 _– Joel Shannon_

## CNN's Cuomo lost 13 pounds; Brooke Baldwin also tests positive

[Chris Cuomo says he's lost a significant amount of weight][9] in a
short time span while battling COVID-19.

The CNN anchor, 49, who revealed [he tested positive for the new
coronavirus][10] Tuesday, appeared on CNN's Global Town Hall broadcast
Thursday night from his basement to give an update on his health, which
included him sharing he "lost 13 pounds in three days."

He also said he's still suffering from a fever, profuse sweating,
headaches and pains in his face.

Fellow CNN anchor Brooke Baldwin said she's experiencing some of the
same symptoms when she revealed Friday that she also tested positive for
COVID-19. Baldwin said she was "OK."

 _– Sara Moniuszko_

## Fauci says all states should issue stay-at-home orders

Dr. Anthony Fauci said he doesn't "understand why that’s not happening"
when asked why [all states haven't issued stay-at-home][11] or shelter-
in-place orders restricting residents' movements.

Speaking at a CNN town hall on the new coronavirus Thursday, Fauci
stopped short of calling for a federally-mandated national lockdown.

"The tension between federally mandated versus states rights to do what
they want is something I don’t want to get into. But if you look at
what’s going on in this country, I just don’t understand why we’re not
doing that. We really should be," said Fauci, head of the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

At least 38 states instituted [some form of stay-at-home order][12] as
of Thursday and roughly 300 million citizens were under a state or city
order to stay put.

Legal experts have said President Donald Trump doesn’t have the
authority to impose a national lockdown as the heads of countries such
as Italy, Spain, France and Britain have done. And in some cases, the
difference between an order and a guidance might be mostly semantics.

## USS Theodore Roosevelt captain fired after pleading for help for sick
sailors

The [Navy fired the captain of the USS Theodore Roosevelt][13] on
Thursday, four days after he pleaded for help as the coronavirus ravaged
his crew.

Acting Navy Secretary Thomas Modly announced that Navy Capt. Brett
Crozier was relieved for loss of confidence.

"I just know that he exercised extremely poor judgment," Modly said.

Crozier had sent an urgent letter to the U.S. Navy on Sunday, seeking to
evacuate and isolate the crew as cases of coronavirus infection
increased on the vessel. "Decisive action" was required to prevent
deaths from the coronavirus, Crozier wrote. The ship's close quarters
prevented sailors from following guidelines to keep them safe.

[Videos posted on social media][14] showed a huge send-off for Crozier
as hundreds of service members were on the hanger deck of the aircraft
carrier, chanting "Captain Crozier! Captain Crozier!" and clapping.

Democratic senators have [called on the Pentagon Inspector General to
investigate the Navy's handling][15] of the COVID-19 pandemic and its
firing of Crozier.

"How many other Theodore Roosevelts are out there?" said Sen. Richard
Blumenthal (D-Conn.), a member of the Armed Services Committee.

He speculated that the Navy had "no idea how many potential hot spots it
has."

 _— Tom Vanden Brook and Nicholas Wu_

People watch as the USNS Comfort medical ship moves up the Hudson River
as it arrives on March 30, 2020 in New York as seen from Weehawken, New
Jersey.

More

## USNS Comfort has only 20 patients on board outside New York City

Just [20 patients were on board the USNS Comfort][16], a Navy hospital
ship equipped with 1,000 beds and 12 operating rooms, New York state and
local officials confirmed Friday morning.

The Comfort, with its 1,200-member crew, was expected to take non-
coronavirus patients to alleviate the stress on New York City hospitals
that have quickly become overcrowded as the number of COVID-19 deaths in
the state skyrocketed past 2,000 on Thursday. But so far, the transfers
have been slow in developing.

"There's no question in my mind that's going to get resolved very
quickly and you're going to see that number grow," New York City Mayor
Bill de Blasio said Friday on CNN.

Another Navy hospital ship, the USNS Mercy, docked in Los Angeles, had
just 15 patients, officials told [the New York Times][17].

The Pentagon on Friday announced less-stringent rules for accepting
patients aboard the ship. Non-COVID-19 patients will be screened at the
pier now instead of local hospitals to allow those facilities to deal
with a crush of patients infected with the coronavirus.

New York had 92,000 positive cases of coronavirus Thursday, including
52,000 in the city.

 _– Joseph Spector and Tom Vanden Brook_

## US stocks fall after huge jobless report

[U.S. stocks posted a third week of losses in the past four][18],
capping a volatile stretch after the government reported a big loss in
jobs last month because of the coronavirus pandemic.

The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 360.91 points to close at
21,052.53. The Standard & Poor’s 500 fell 1.5% to end at 2,488.65, as
energy shares gave back gains after crude prices eased. For the week,
the Dow fell more than 2.5% while the S&P 500 shed 2%.

Stocks had held steady at first Friday, but headed lower after energy
stocks gave up gains as crude prices lost momentum. The fresh bout of
volatility signaled that investors were selling riskier assets like
stocks heading into the weekend, analysts say.

 _– Jessica Menton_

## More USA TODAY coronavirus headlines

• Disruption in normal routines and stress over outside threats may lead
to anxiety and depression in children. **[This is parenting during the
pandemic.][19]**

• **Tracking coronavirus:**  [See the U.S. outbreak, state by
state.][20]

• The first US coronavirus patients are being treated with convalescent
plasma therapy. **[Will it work? ][21]**

• **Burials without funerals, grief without hugs:** [Coronavirus is
changing how we say goodbye.][22]

• **Support Local:**[Here's how you can help save a business in your
community. ][23]

## Passengers begin disembarking ill-fated cruise ships in Florida

Hundreds of passengers from two ill-fated cruise ships [began
disembarking Friday ][24]in Florida, the critically ill heading for
local hospitals and the healthy passengers heading for the airport.

After being turned back from several South American ports for weeks, the
two ships [finally docked in Florida][25] on Thursday after reaching an
agreement with local authorities.  The exodus from the MS Zaandaam and
its sister ship the MS Rotterdam was expected to continue throughout the
day. Some of the 14 critically ill passengers were wheeled off on
stretchers.

Holland America said around 1,200 asymptomatic passengers were being
allowed to disembark after passing a health screening and were leaving
on a series of charter flights. Another 38 passengers who are Florida
residents would receive private transportation home. A total of 107
passengers and 143 crew members had presented flu-like symptoms since
March 22, according to a Holland America statement.

The bodies of two elderly passenger whose deaths were blamed on COVID-19
were removed from the Zaandam on Thursday.

Meanwhile, the Coral Princess, operated by Carnival Corp., is scheduled
to arrive at Port Everglades on Saturday with at least 12 confirmed
cases of COVID-19 among its 1,000 passengers, the cruise line said.

 _\- Doug Stanglin_

## Kushner draws backlash for 'our stockpile' comment at briefing

White House senior adviser [Jared Kushner made a rare appearance][26]
during Thursday's coronavirus task force briefing, which drew backlash
when he referred to the national stockpile of medical supplies as "our
stockpile" and not one belonging to states.

Kushner, the president's son-in-law who doesn't often make public
appearances, says he has been serving on the coronavirus task force at
the direction of Vice President Mike Pence.

When asked about data showing states' need for equipment, Kushner said,
"The notion of the federal stockpile is that it's supposed to be our
stockpile. It's not supposed to be states' stockpiles that they then
use."

Critics, including Rep. Ted Lieu, D-Calif., Joe Lockhart, former press
secretary for President Bill Clinton and former White House ethics chief
Walter Shaub, pounced on Kushner's comments.

"It is for the American people...as the federal government's OWN
strategic national stockpile website assures us!" Shaub [tweeted][27].

 _– Nicholas Wu_

## Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin: Expect $1,200 payment in two weeks

Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said many Americans reeling from the
financial impacts caused by the coronavirus outbreak can expect to see
their one-time stimulus payments of up to $1,200 show up in their bank
accounts in about two weeks. For those without direct deposit, Mnuchin
promised checks would go out quickly as well.

The announcement followed a memo sent out by House Democrats that warned
some Americans could have to wait up to 20 weeks before they receive
their checks.

When asked Thursday about the memo, which was sent out by the House Ways
and Means Committee, Mnuchin said it wouldn't take that long.

"Quickly, as a matter of weeks and not months," Mnuchin said of the
money going out.

– _Christal Hayes_

## More coronavirus news and information from USA TODAY

 _Contributing: The Associated Press_

 _This article originally appeared on USA TODAY:[Coronavirus updates:
CDC says cloth masks for public; US deaths top 7K][28]_

   [1]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/money/2020/04/03/coronavirus-economy-loses-701-000-jobs-march-virus-spreads/5119265002/
   [2]: https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html
   [3]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/reviewedcom/2020/04/03/covid-19-where-buy-materials-make-masks-home/2940762001/
   [4]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/money/2020/04/02/coronavirus-americans-file-initial-jobless-claims-layoffs-mount/5110129002/
   [5]: https://bit.ly/3462gMK
   [6]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/travel/news/2020/04/03/coronavirus-newark-tsa-officer-becomes-agencys-first-to-die/2943326001/
   [7]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/health/2020/04/02/coronavirus-cases-illinois-convention-center-transforms-into-hospital/5113486002/
   [8]: https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/
   [9]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/entertainment/celebrities/2020/04/03/coronavirus-chris-cuomo-cnn-anchor-says-he-lost-13-pounds-3-days/2938664001/
   [10]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/entertainment/celebrities/2020/03/31/chris-cuomo-tests-positive-coronavirus-covid-19/5094751002/
   [11]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2020/04/02/states-without-stay-home-orders-residents-celebrate-freedoms/5105303002/
   [12]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2020/03/30/coronavirus-stay-home-shelter-in-place-orders-by-state/5092413002/
   [13]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/04/02/navy-fires-roosevelt-captain-coronavirus-help-ship-sailors/5116256002/
   [14]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/04/03/coronavirus-capt-brett-crozier-gets-send-off-uss-roosevelt/2939098001/
   [15]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/04/03/senators-demand-navy-probe-after-handling-covid-19-crozier-firing/2943063001/
   [16]: https://bit.ly/2X5FkvJ
   [17]: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/02/nyregion/ny-coronavirus-usns-comfort.html
   [18]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/money/2020/04/03/dow-markets-unemployment-jumps-march-coronavirus/2938819001/
   [19]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2020/04/02/parenting-amid-covid-19-expert-tips-how-help-kids-home/5109387002/
   [20]: https://www.usatoday.com/in-depth/graphics/2020/03/10/us-coronavirus-map-tracking-united-states-outbreak/4945223002/
   [21]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/health/2020/04/01/coronavirus-plasma-therapy-5-us-patients-covid-19-donors/5090946002/
   [22]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2020/04/02/funerals-during-coronavirus-pandemic-no-hugs-big-gatherings/5102855002/
   [23]: https://supportlocal.usatoday.com/?utm_source=bnm&utm_medium=discover&utm_campaign=supportlocal&utm_content=news&utm_term=usatoday
   [24]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/travel/cruises/2020/04/03/coronavirus-holland-america-cruise-ships-disembark-florida/2938963001/
   [25]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/travel/cruises/2020/04/02/coronavirus-holland-america-ships-dock-fort-lauderdale/5110778002/
   [26]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/04/03/coronavirus-jared-kushner-draws-backlash-our-stockpile-comment/2938648001/
   [27]: https://twitter.com/waltshaub/status/1245889007072010240?s=20
   [28]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/health/2020/04/03/coronavirus-live-updates-face-masks-unemployment-furloughs-fauci/5117650002/