---
title: "Trump sees 'hard days' ahead in coronavirus fight, with as many as 240,000 Americans dead"
date: "2020-04-01T0305"
hero: "http://l2.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/_W1PicDe.Jz76xfrdM6IPQ--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media-mbst-pub-ue1.s3.amazonaws.com/creatr-uploaded-images/2020-03/aa030a00-73a7-11ea-bf73-0c4fd1a4808f"
---
[ ][1]

[][1]

WASHINGTON — Nearly a quarter million people in the United States could
die as a result of the coronavirus outbreak, Trump administration
officials said Tuesday.

That grim forecast is based on statistical models that have guided the
administration’s response, and which were displayed at Tuesday’s White
House press briefing of the coronavirus task force. In what was
presented as a best case scenario in which millions of citizens across
the country adhered to intensive social distancing guidelines promoted
by the Trump administration, between 100,000 and 240,000 Americans are
still expected to be killed by COVID-19.

But if the strict public health measures are ignored, the toll could be
much higher, the officials said.

“We’re going to do everything we can to get [the U.S. death toll]
significantly below that,” said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, [whose forthright
manner has made him a star of the coronavirus briefings][2].

Tuesday’s briefing was the second in a row in which officials openly
discussed the possibility that more than 100,000 U.S. residents could
lose their life thanks to COVID-19. The somber tone from those who spoke
from the briefing room podium was a bracing departure from the days when
President Trump was describing the disease as a “very little problem”
that would go away on its own. It is also, however, much lower than the
2.2 million Americans that a study by the [Imperial College London
][3]projected would be killed as the coronavirus spread.

Trump took credit Tuesday for taking measures that he said had prevented
the deaths of millions, noting that some confidants had told him to not
to “do anything, just ride it out and think of it as the flu.” This was
a seeming reference to conservative media personalities including Sean
Hannity and Rush Limbaugh, [who devoted airtime during a critical period
in February and early March][4] — when the nation could have been
preparing for the epidemic — to convincing their audiences and Trump
that the coronavirus was no more harmful than the common flu.

Many, though not all, of Trump’s outside advisers have since taken the
coronavirus more seriously — as has he.

“I want every American to be prepared for the hard days that lie ahead.
We’re gonna go through a very tough two weeks,” the president said
during Tuesday’s briefing, which lasted over two hours. The number of
infections and deaths from COVID-19, the lower respiratory disease
caused by the coronavirus, is expected to continue to rise toward an
apex, even as social distancing measures are widened and extended and
hospitals already near capacity struggle to treat patients.

The benefits of that countervailing effort may not be evident for some
time, though Fauci said Tuesday that he was seeing the first signs that
social distancing efforts were beginning to work.

President Trump during a briefing about the coronavirus at the White
House on Tuesday. (Alex Brandon/AP)

More

Still, it will not be until May, at the very earliest, that Americans
will begin to return to work. Accordingly, the president repeatedly
emphasized that it would be “a very, very painful two weeks,” and seemed
to dispense with any last pretenses that the battle against the
coronavirus would be won with ease. Gone too was his assertion that the
battle [would be won by Easter][5].

For the past two weeks, the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak in the
United States has been New York City, where [it has already killed 1,096
people][6]. And although there are encouraging signs that the city’s
efforts are proving effective, there is also — frustratingly — evidence
that the coronavirus is poised to devastate other parts of the country.

During Tuesday’s briefing, Dr. Deborah Birx, a prominent member of the
coronavirus task force, singled out Chicago, Detroit and New Orleans as
potential outbreak locations in the coming days and weeks. The goal, she
said, was to “try to make sure each of those cities act more like
California than the New York metro area.”

While the mayor of New York, Bill de Blasio, initially [hesitated in
taking aggressive action][7] to halt the spread of the virus in the
nation’s most populous city, California Gov. Gavin Newsom has been
widely praised for recognizing the threat early and [acting quickly to
slow the rate of infection][8].

Birx also reiterated that because vaccines and treatments are still many
months away, it is up to individual Americans to make decisions that
quell the pandemic. “There’s no magic bullet. There’s no magic vaccine
or therapy,” said Birx, who gained renown for her efforts against
HIV/AIDS. “It’s just behaviors.” Those behaviors include practicing
social distancing, avoiding travel and washing hands.

For portions of the briefing, Trump did offer [some moments of
optimism][9], promising that the collective coronavirus fever would
break soon enough. “As a nation, we face a difficult few weeks as we
approach that, that really important day when we’re gonna see things get
better all of a sudden.”

Trump compared that day — whenever it finally arrives — to “a burst of
light.”

_____

[ _Click here_][10] _for the_[ _latest coronavirus news and
updates_][11] _. According to experts, people over 60 and those who are
immunocompromised continue to be the most at risk. If you have
questions, please reference the_[ _CDC_][12] _and_[ _WHO’s_][13]
_resource guides._

 **Read more:**

   [1]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus
   [2]: https://news.yahoo.com/meet-dr-anthony-fauci-the-us-coronavirus-point-man-who-helped-save-the-world-from-aids-090023622.html
   [3]: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/16/us/coronavirus-fatality-rate-white-house.html
   [4]: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/11/us/politics/coronavirus-conservative-media.html
   [5]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus-april-30-trump-231133227.html
   [6]: https://twitter.com/AnnaESanders/status/1245130710463188992
   [7]: https://news.yahoo.com/the-mistakes-that-turned-new-york-into-an-epicenter-of-the-coronavirus-epidemic-090040375.html
   [8]: https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2020-03-16/gavin-newsom-california-restaurants-theaters-closures-coronavirus
   [9]: https://www.npr.org/2017/01/19/510628862/how-positive-thinking-helped-propel-trump-to-the-presidency
   [10]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus-covid-19-news-and-live-updates-120246923.html
   [11]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus/
   [12]: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/summary.html
   [13]: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019