---
title: "Israel sends army to ultra-Orthodox city over coronavirus"
date: "2020-04-03T1723"
hero: "http://l.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/ek2wH2YzS8Rk5EALRpTG8Q--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/http://media.zenfs.com/en_us/News/afp.com/0d755c6e4c31977d60645d7f7670224c300f2267.jpg"
---
Jerusalem (AFP) - Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Friday gave the
green light for soldiers to be deployed in a mostly ultra-Orthodox
Jewish city considered the centre of Israel's novel coronavirus
outbreak.

"In light of the special situation in Bnei Brak following the
restrictions due to the coronavirus, the IDF (army) will immediately
present the necessary civil assistance to Bnei Brak municipality in
fulfilling its responsibilities," Netanyahu's office said after talks
with security and health officials.

Authorities have enforced restrictions on access to Bnei Brak, a
majority ultra-Orthodox city near Tel Aviv that is home to around
200,000 people.

More than 7,000 cases of COVID-19, including 40 deaths, have been
officially declared in Israel.

According to local media, half of those infected are ultra-Orthodox
Jews, a community which represents only around 10 percent of the Israeli
population.

Many ultra-Orthodox Jews have refused to comply with confinement
measures and social distancing.

This week has seen tense exchanges as police stepped up patrols of
ultra-Orthodox neighbourhoods that have become virus hotspots.

Netanyahu himself re-entered precautionary quarantine this week after
Health Minister Yaakov Litzman, a leading member of the ultra-Orthodox
community, tested positive for COVID-19.

\- 'Not without risk' -

Army spokesman Jonathan Conricus said the military would deploy
800-1,000 soldiers in Bnei Brak to "assist" local authorities "because
of the severity of the situation there and because of the relative lack
of implementation of health ministry instructions".

Soldiers will help distribute food and medicine and help with the
evacuation of people with virus symptoms, Conricus told an online
conference call with reporters.

He said the army would also seek to ensure health messages were reaching
the ultra-Orthodox community.

Motti Ravid, director of Mayanei Yeshua hospital in Bnei Brak, told AFP
earlier this week that with internet and television prohibited in the
ultra-Orthodox community on religious grounds, government directives
took a long time to filter through.

Even for those using mobile phones, access to the internet and most
message services is blocked, shutting them off from the main form of
communication used by the health ministry.

Conricus said soldiers would wear orange and most of them would not
carry weapons.

He anticipated misunderstandings and frustrations among the community,
but "we are taking that into consideration".

Commanders "are doing a crash course" on the "social fabrics" of Bnei
Brak to minimise friction, the spokesman said.

"It is a very delicate" situation, he said. "It is not without risk."

\- 75,000 cases in Bnei Brak? -

Ran Saar, director of the health care organisation Maccabi, has said
almost 40 percent of the population of Bnei Brak could be infected by
the novel coronavirus, equivalent to nearly 75,000 cases.

"According to various indicators, about 38 percent of Bnei Brak
residents are ill," Saar said Thursday before a parliamentary committee
examining the government response to the pandemic.

Israelis are currently restricted from venturing out more than 100
metres (330 feet) from their homes, except to go to the supermarket,
pharmacy or hospital.

Netanyahu has said that the Passover holiday, which begins Wednesday and
lasts eight days, could be a "turning point" in the fight against the
novel coronavirus if precautions are followed.

Last month, gatherings for the religious festival of Purim were banned,
but many ultra-Orthodox defied the restrictions, which authorities say
contributed to the spread of the virus.

In Bnei Brak, some residents have not only ignored health regulations
but also faced off with the police.

A number of them were reportedly part of a group known as the Jerusalem
Faction, which is fiercely opposed to the integration of ultra-Orthodox
Jews in the army.