---
title: "After ignoring warnings, Israeli ultra-Orthodox hit by virus"
date: "2020-04-03T0643"
hero: "http://l1.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/ERpqQzkhDtVSi4IUjup6.Q--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en/ap.org/334d7bd6a7a6f74ba658d8cef70f9368"
---
BNEI BRAK, Israel (AP) — Early this week, the streets of the central
Israeli city of Bnei Brak were bustling with shoppers as ultra-Orthodox
residents, obeying their religious leaders, ignored pleas to stay home
in the face of the coronavirus threat.

By Friday, Bnei Brak had become the country's worst hot spot and now
resembles a ghost town. The military will soon be sending troops in to
assist local authorities. One expert estimated that nearly 40% of the
city's population might already have been infected.

The city has become a lightning rod for anger and frustration by some
secular Israelis who allege insular Haredi communities — with
disproportionately high numbers of confirmed cases — are undermining
national efforts to contain the virus.

The pandemic also has threatened to upend deep-seated customs in the
religious world, including blind obedience to religious leaders and the
belief that religious studies and traditions take precedence over the
rules of a modern state.

The crisis is rooted in a combination of factors. Israel’s ultra-
Orthodox tend to live in poor, crowded neighborhoods where sickness can
quickly spread. Synagogues, the centerpiece of social life, bring men
together to pray and socialize in small spaces.

“I am very, very concerned that we’ll see a broader contagion in the
ultra-Orthodox community and to the broader Israeli population,” said
Hagai Levine, a Hebrew University professor who chairs the Israeli
Association of Public Health Physicians.

Since Israel's founding, secular and ultra-Orthodox Israelis have viewed
each other with suspicion, and tensions have erupted repeatedly over hot
button issues such as the military draft. Ultra-Orthodox leaders have
used their considerable political leverage to help maintain the
community's insular lifestyle with government grants, feeding secular
complaints that the haredim are a burden to the collective.

A new debate erupted Thursday when Health Minister Yaakov Litzman, a
powerful ultra-Orthodox politician meant to lead the battle against the
virus, was confirmed to be infected.

This forced Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, the ministry’s director
general and reportedly the head of the Mossad spy agency, into
quarantine because of exposure to Litzman. Netanyahu, who tested
negative, went through an identical experience after a previous exposure
to an infected ultra-Orthodox aide.

Channel 12 TV said ministry officials were furious with Litzman, who had
resisted calls in recent weeks to impose restrictions on gatherings at
religious institutions. The channel said Litzman had quietly been
breaking the rules and attending prayer sessions at synagogues.

“An outbreak in Bnei Brak is the same as an outbreak in Tel Aviv.
Litzman did not just betray his own voters. He betrayed all Israelis,”
Zehava Galon, a former leader of the secular Meretz party, wrote in the
Haaretz daily.

When Israel began shutting down schools, workplaces and its
international airport last month to slow the outbreak, Litzman was not
the only religious leader to resist.

Influential Rabbi Chaim Kanievsky of Bnei Brak said closing religious
seminaries is more harmful than the virus. “The Torah protects and
saves,” he said.

In recent weeks, attempts by police to enforce quarantine orders in Bnei
Brak and religious neighborhoods of Jerusalem resulted in standoffs with
angry crowds. Some shouted “Nazis” as police arrested or fined
violators.

Police say officers have been assaulted multiple times and several
paramedics have been injured by ultra-Orthodox crowds.

In recent days, defiance has subsided as the scale of the outbreak
became clear. Kanievsky, 92, now urges followers to stay at home.

For most people, the virus causes mild or moderate symptoms, such as
fever and cough. But for others, especially older adults and people with
existing health problems, it can cause severe symptoms like pneumonia
that can be fatal.

Israel has over 7,000 reported cases, with 38 deaths. Jerusalem and Bnei
Brak, home to large ultra-Orthodox communities, have the largest
concentrations.

Ran Saar, who runs the Maccabi Healthcare Services, a leading provider,
told parliament he estimates some 75,000 people in Bnei Brak, or 38% of
the population, could be infected. He said the city has many elderly
residents and called for urgent action.

Saar said his estimates were based on test data. He told Channel 12 that
he believes thousands of people are refusing to be tested because they
don't want to disrupt next week's Passover holiday.

The government declared Bnei Brak a “restricted zone" Thursday, limiting
movement in and out of the city. Earlier in the day, police patrols were
already out in large numbers to make sure residents remained indoors.

Streets normally crowded with Passover shoppers were deserted. Police in
white hazmat suits raided a synagogue, sending some 15 worshippers home
with fines of over $100 each. One police car broadcast stay-home appeals
in Yiddish, a European language still common in ultra-Orthodox circles.

The government is also sending in troops to help local authorities in
Bnei Brak. Two battalions, each numbering around 450 soldiers, will
distribute food, medicine and supplies and help to relocate symptomatic
or high-risk people to quarantine facilities.

The soldiers will not be policing the area or enforcing movement
restrictions, and most will be unarmed, according to Lt. Col. Jonathan
Conricus, a military spokesman. He acknowledged it was a “delicate
situation.”

Anshel Pfeffer, a commentator at Haaretz, said the crisis presents a
major challenge to the rabbis' traditional authority and the ultra-
Orthodox way of life.

“The community was already facing challenges before the coronavirus
crisis,” he said. “But this is certainly bringing a lot of these
challenges to a head.”