---
title: "Asian countries impose new restrictions as coronavirus cases come roaring back"
date: "2020-04-02T2228"
hero: "http://l1.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/hxFYGOl7fwvx4gkSeMrl.w--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en/la_times_articles_853/90a06695fb6f54e6d8fb85b58972501f"
---
Vietnam has banned public gatherings of more than two people. Hong Kong
has closed nightclubs, karaoke bars and mah-jongg parlors, and deployed
health inspectors to check that restaurants are seating parties at least
six feet apart.

And Singapore on Friday said that schools and nonessential businesses
would close for a month, a sweeping shutdown it had avoided until now.

Suddenly, Asian governments that appeared to be bringing the coronavirus
[under control][1] are imposing new social restrictions as the numbers
of infections — many from overseas — [continue to rise][2].

In places that took [early, effective action][3] against the COVID-19
outbreak, the stepped-up measures in recent days are a sign that
fighting the disease will take much longer than anticipated. They also
show that governments must adapt their responses as the threat from the
virus evolves, epidemiologists say.

“We have to find measures that can control, slow down the virus, and do
so in a way that is sustainable — not just for two weeks, two months,
but all the way through to the end of the year,” Lawrence Wong, co-chair
of Singapore’s coronavirus task force, said this week.

The novel coronavirus “is now so widespread that it is highly unlikely
that our current control measures would be able to drive this virus out
of the human population,” said Ooi Eng Eong, deputy director of the
Emerging Infectious Diseases Program at the Duke-NUS Medical School in
Singapore. “Without a vaccine or antiviral drug, we should expect to
deal with this virus [for] the long haul.”

Observing new government guidelines, people sit at a distance from each
other at Singapore's Marina Bay on Monday.  (Ore Huiying / Getty Images)

More

That has become clear as several Asian countries see infections rising
rapidly, most commonly in people who traveled to newer hot spots such as
the [U.S.][4] and [Europe][5].

Singapore and Vietnam, despite their proximity to the source of the
outbreak in China, managed to keep a lid on coronavirus cases starting
in January thanks to vigilant traveler screening, contact tracing and
quarantining of suspected infections.

Hong Kong quickly closed schools, museums and government buildings,
although residents were otherwise spared the hugely disruptive shutdowns
and shelter-in-place orders now in force in much of the U.S.

A security guard in a Hong Kong shopping mall.  (Anthony Wallace /
AFP/Getty Images)

More

As COVID-19 cases surged in the U.S. and Europe, Asian countries also
began to close their borders. But starting in early March, residents who
were living or studying abroad rushed back home, bringing with them a
second wave of infections.

In the last two weeks, the number of cases in Singapore has quadrupled
to more than 1,000. Most were recent travelers who were immediately
placed in isolation to reduce the risk of transmission.

New infections are also emerging in people with no recent travel
history, a worrying sign that the disease continues to circulate in the
community more than two months after Singapore’s first controls were
implemented.

On Thursday, Singapore notched 74 new infections, its highest single-day
total, 54 of them from transmission within the community. Ten were
[linked to a senior citizens’ home][6], prompting the government to
announce a monthlong ban on visitors to nursing homes island-wide.

Experts say countries must be alert to a resurgence of the virus when
existing measures lapse or people start to grow complacent.

“With the second wave, we are finding it a lot harder to control local
spread as well as stop imported cases,” said Paul Ananth Tambyah,
Singapore-based president of the Asia Pacific Society of Clinical
Microbiology and Infection. “That is something that all countries will
probably eventually discover.”

Hong Kong has limited the size of weddings to 20 people as part of
social distancing measures.  (Anthony Kwan / Getty Images)

More

Hong Kong, known for its nightlife, last week banned gatherings of more
than four people but let bars and pubs remain open, even as dozens of
infections were [linked to such venues][7]. On Thursday, as the
government recorded 37 more cases to bring its total to 802, watering
holes were ordered to close for two weeks.

Vietnam, among the first countries to block travel from China and close
schools, went three weeks without recording a new infection. In the last
month, however, the number of confirmed cases has risen from 16 to more
than 220.

The communist-led nation has since banned all foreign visitors and
ordered a two-week lockdown starting Wednesday, a dramatic tightening in
what had been one of Asia’s [fastest-growing economies][8].

Traffic was light in Hanoi on Wednesday, the first day of Vietnam's two-
week nationwide shutdown to stop the spread of the coronavirus.  (Linh
Pham / Getty Images)

More

Experts say that Vietnam is still seeing mostly clusters of infections,
meaning the virus isn’t spreading in the population in a significant
way. Vietnam’s rulers are hoping that tough measures will keep its
still-developing health system from being overwhelmed with COVID-19
patients.

“I’m sure that’s what’s on their minds, that if they can prevent
transmission now perhaps they can have an easier time in the future,“
said Todd Pollack, an infectious diseases specialist at Harvard Medical
School who leads a Harvard-based health initiative in Hanoi.

“But the borders can’t stay closed forever. And if other countries
haven’t had that same level of success against the virus, you’re going
to continually deal with imported cases.”

In prosperous Singapore, which had earlier banned large gatherings and
instituted temperature checks at high-traffic buildings, stricter
measures implemented last week limited private gatherings to 10 people.
Authorities suspended all religious services and closed bars, karaoke
lounges and nightclubs, and warned that anyone standing within three
feet of another person in line could face up to six months in jail.

Officials also ordered commercial establishments to ensure three feet of
space between patrons. At cafes and shopping centers, employees taped a
large “X” on every other seat, denoting where people aren’t supposed to
sit.

People observe safe distancing at a shopping mall in Singapore.  (Ore
Huiying / Getty Images)

More

But on Friday, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong said the continued rise in
community infections warranted new, even more aggressive measures. He
called on citizens to "bear with the painful adjustments we have to
make" with the monthlong shutdown of schools and nonessential
businesses.

Experts say Singapore’s gradual approach had allowed life to carry on
more or less as normal for a population accustomed to efficient public
services. But officials began to believe that people weren't taking the
pandemic seriously enough.

At a news conference this week, Wong, the coronavirus task force chief,
lamented that some Singaporeans were still asking whether they could go
to malls or have parties of fewer than 10 people. Such requests were
“missing the point” of the need for social distancing, he said.

Ooi at the Duke-NUS Medical School said all governments had to balance
society's patience with what was needed to tame the virus.

“Working out sustainable disease control measures, which may be
different from city to city due to local nuances, are just as important
as implementing emergency measures,” he said.

 **Updates** :  
 **3:55 AM, Apr. 03, 2020** : _The story has been updated to reflect
more aggressive measures announced by Singapore on Friday._  
  
  
  

   [1]: https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2020-03-20/asia-coronavirus-pandemic-response-lessons-for-united-states
   [2]: https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2020-03-19/coronavirus-asia-second-wave
   [3]: https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2020-03-11/a-singaporeans-view-of-the-coronavirus-its-surprising-to-see-the-u-s-so-messed-up
   [4]: https://www.latimes.com/opinion/story/2020-04-01/superspreading-choir-practice-coronavirus
   [5]: https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2020-03-25/we-are-collapsing-virus-pummels-medics-in-spain-and-italy
   [6]: https://partners.aic.sg/sites/aicassets/AssetGallery/Press%20Release/Media%20Statement_LAM_1%20Apr2020_v2.pdf
   [7]: https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2020-03-24/you-might-get-shamed-for-wearing-a-mask-in-california-but-in-asia-its-the-opposite
   [8]: https://www.latimes.com/world/la-fg-vietnam-trade-war-20190712-story.html