---
title: "One nursing home offers grim advice: Take your loved ones home"
date: "2020-04-02T2359"
hero: "http://l2.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/1qNBza7z30wE_cN6XBh5AQ--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-US/nbc_news_122/152d45b2a47b2a25fab88fa53fe945f9"
---
Since suffering a traumatic brain injury five years ago, Eliot Loshak,
87, has been unable to get out of bed on his own. His eyesight is
heavily damaged, and he needs help from the staff at his Manhattan
nursing home just to call his only daughter, Pam.

With the coronavirus now spreading through the nursing home, Pam Loshak
fears for her ailing father — and for the staff members at the Mary
Manning Walsh Home, who don't have enough personal protective equipment
to slow transmission of the disease, despite their hands-on care for
those most vulnerable to the virus.

ArchCare, which runs the facility and four other nursing homes in the
New York area, has been forced to outfit staff members in rain ponchos
and beautician gowns to stretch their dwindling supply of protective
gear, according to Scott LaRue, president and CEO of the company, which
is affiliated with the Archdiocese of New York. Employees are given one
N95 mask — meant to be single-use — to last an entire week.

"I don't feel safe," an aide at one ArchCare facility said, declining to
be named for fear of retaliation.

More than 200 of ArchCare's 1,700 nursing home residents are infected
with the coronavirus, and more than 20 have died, LaRue said. At least
10 staff members are also infected, with one in the hospital on a
ventilator.

The risks are so serious that LaRue is advising family members to pull
residents out if feasible. "If you have the ability to take your loved
one home, and that's possible, I would encourage you to do so," he said.
"There will be better isolation and better limited contact in a home
than there would be in a nursing home."

LaRue says just a few families have done so, as the medical and personal
needs of most residents are too complex to handle at home.

 _ **Do you have a story to share about how the coronavirus is affecting
nursing homes?[Contact us ][1]**_

The ArchCare aide said that staff members are only being given one
disposable gown for their entire shift, even if it becomes soiled, and
they must constantly circulate between residents who are infected and
those who are not.

"How do you expect to use the same gown? We are cleaning them, wiping
their mouths, there's stuff on us," the aide said. "I feel like I'm
spreading the virus."

 _ **[Full coverage of the coronavirus outbreak][2]**_

While one area of the nursing home where she works had once been
designated for infected residents, there are now so many who are sick
that they are mixed in throughout the entire facility, the aide added.

Pam Loshak, 42, a publicist who lives in Harlem, is painfully aware of
the risks her father faces if he stays at his nursing home, but she
doesn't know where else he could go. Eliot Loshak needs a motorized lift
and two people just to move him to a chair, and he frequently suffers
from health problems that require expert attention.

"I live alone in an apartment — there's just no way I could give him the
care he needs," Pam Loshak said.

She is grateful to the nursing home staff for carefully tending to her
father, but is pained to think of what could happen as the virus
spreads. Her father already has respiratory problems because fluid
builds up in his lungs while he's bedridden, she explained. If her
father gets infected, she fears, "he would die for sure."

## 'It is impossible for us to stop the spread'

Over the past week, coronavirus infections at nursing homes have
skyrocketed: More than 400 long-term care facilities around the United
States now have infected residents, according to the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention — [a 172 percent increase][3] in a single week.
In New York state, one in four nursing homes have cases of the virus;
1,228 residents have tested positive and 224 have died, according to a
spokeswoman for the state health department.

But nursing homes have been unable to get enough protective gear and
tests, in part because overwhelmed hospitals are getting the supplies
first, industry executives and groups say.

"We seem to be a second-tier priority," said Stephen Hanse, president
and CEO of the NYS Health Facilities Association-NYS Center for Assisted
Living, which represents long-term care facilities.

That has made it harder for nursing homes to slow the transmission of
the coronavirus among staff members and elderly residents. Those [over
the age of 70][4] and with underlying health conditions are
significantly more likely to die from the virus.

In Washington state, which reported the first coronavirus cases in the
U.S., 35 people died after an outbreak at the Life Care Center of
Kirkland, a skilled nursing facility. A CDC [report][5] found that a
lack of personal protective equipment and staff members who continued to
work while sick helped fuel the deadly outbreak, which quickly
[spread][6] to other nursing homes in the area.

In recent days, similar cases have exploded across the country. At one
facility in Stafford, Connecticut, three residents have died and at
least six employees are now infected, with staff [reporting][7] a lack
of protective gear and limited testing. At two nursing homes in
southwest Pennsylvania, infections [are mounting][8] among both
residents and staff, who say they don't have enough masks to protect
themselves. In Louisiana, where 13 residents have died in a single
nursing home, one 130-bed nursing home [reported][9] having no personal
protective gear at all.

"We're in a situation where it is impossible for us to stop the spread
of the virus," LaRue said. "They say this is our highest-risk population
— the one we have to protect the most — and they're not giving us what
we need to do that."

Employees are trying their best to keep scarce equipment clean and to
limit visits to the rooms of different patients, the ArchCare aide said.
But it is impossible to avoid hands-on contact while assisting residents
with eating, bathing, toileting and other basic tasks, in addition to
the medical care they regularly receive from staff doctors and nurses.
One supervisor suggested that staff members use garbage bags to protect
their gowns, the aide said.

Protective gear is especially critical in nursing homes since many
residents have physical limitations or dementia that prevent them from
being able to cover their mouths when they cough, or from wearing a mask
themselves.

"Nursing homes and all long-term care providers desperately need PPE,"
the American Health Care Association, which represents nursing homes and
other long-term care facilities, said in a statement Monday.

Last week, ArchCare executives made an urgent plea to New York City for
28,000 gowns and 28,000 face shields to protect their nurses, aides and
other employees.

The city's emergency management department sent less than 1,000 of each
— not even a full day's supply for ArchCare's five facilities, LaRue
said.

When asked about the shortages facing New York City nursing homes, a
spokesman for the city Department of Health and Mental Hygiene said
officials are "working furiously" to supply them with protective
equipment.

"These facilities will get weekly supplies of personal protective
equipment based on need, as well as emergency orders should the need
arise," the spokesman, Michael Lanza, said. The state health department
said it was "communicating regularly with nursing home providers and
industry leads" about their needs for protective gear.

Last week, New York state officials and a local hospital association
helped ArchCare track down 4,000 gowns and 4,000 face shields, but that
doesn't come close to meeting the need, LaRue said.

Supplies have been scarce on all levels of government: Many states,
including New York, have only received a fraction of the personal
protective equipment and other critically needed supplies that they have
[requested][10] from the federal government's stockpile, [prompting
growing calls][11] for President Donald Trump to use a wartime law to
broadly coordinate production and distribution.

The Trump administration, however, has [narrowly limited][12] its use of
the law and continues to tell states to buy the supplies themselves from
private vendors. But the massive demand for masks, gowns, face shields
and other equipment has created [chaos][13] as states, hospitals,
nursing homes and other facilities are all competing to purchase the
same critically needed supplies.

On Monday, ArchCare finally found a vendor who agreed to sell $237,000
worth of face shields and hazmat suits, shipped from China within a
week, according to an invoice provided by the company.

But the deal fell through at the last minute after ArchCare discovered
that a bank account set up to receive the funds was "opened with
fraudulent documentation," according to a company email.

ArchCare and other nursing homes are now [appealing][14] to private
donors to help fill the need.

"Everyone we serve has the right to the same resources, and their life
is just as valuable as anybody else's," LaRue said.

## A widespread problem

Nursing homes are also facing a lack of testing, which makes it even
harder for them to contain the virus. While more private labs have begun
offering coronavirus tests, testing at nursing homes remains highly
limited because of a [shortage][15] of swabs and other components needed
to conduct the tests, as well as restrictive state guidelines.

On March 21, New York state issued an [advisory][16] stating that any
nursing home residents or health workers in the New York City area with
symptoms of acute respiratory illness "should be presumed to be
COVID-19," and that testing for those residents "is no longer
necessary."

That has made it impossible to identify and isolate all the residents
who are infected from those who are not, LaRue said. "If I had my
druthers, I'd do widespread testing, and I would test every employee."

 _ **Download the[NBC News app][17] for full coverage of the coronavirus
outbreak**_

ArchCare struggled last week to find just 30 tests from a private lab,
which quickly ran out.

The problem is widespread, according to the American Health Care
Association: "We have heard from many providers about residents and
staff getting declined when trying to be tested. This is extremely
worrisome."

Highland Care Center, a nursing home in Queens that is not owned by
ArchCare, had a resident hospitalized with the coronavirus last week.
Other residents are also showing symptoms, which the facility reported
to the city health department, but they still haven't been tested, the
facility's administrator, Don Morris, said. "We don't know if they are
coming to test."

## A 'frightening' lack of communication

As the virus overtakes nursing homes across the country, many families
feel helpless and increasingly cut off from their loved ones.

To protect residents from outside infection, New York and many other
states have [banned visitors][18] from nursing homes. Updates from the
management may be limited and sporadic: The Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services requires nursing homes to notify family members if
their relative has a confirmed coronavirus infection, but not if others
in the facility have tested positive.

External oversight is also [limited][19]: The federal government has [temporarily suspended][20] routine health and safety inspections to focus on high-risk facilities, and state ombudsmen are also currently barred from visiting nursing homes and most assisted living facilities.

At ArchCare's Mary Manning Walsh, families were notified Monday that
staff-assisted videoconferencing with residents would be suspended for
safety reasons, and they were asked to limit calls to the facility. "I
ask for your patience in knowing that if someone is not getting back to
you immediately, they are directly treating our community," Michael
Monahan, the facility's director, wrote.

In an email accompanying the notice, Carlotta Gladding, a member of the
residents council, urged families to be patient as staff members are
"doing their utmost best to provide safe care for your loved ones."

Image: Carlotta Gladding and her 105-year-old-aunt. (Courtesy of
Carlotta Gladding)

More

But Gladding, whose 105-year-old aunt is at the facility, acknowledges
how difficult it has been for families to be cut off from residents as
the virus has spread.

"It's nerve-wracking and frustrating and frightening, especially since
you may have no communication with your loved one," she said.

Pam Loshak has limited her own phone calls to spare the staff and last
spoke with her father in mid-March, when visitors were first banned. She
told him to try and cover his mouth if he had to cough, but she knew
even that would be tough, given his weak muscles and limited motor
control. She tried to be as reassuring as possible, and let him know she
was OK.

"Just sit tight," she told him.

 **Editor’s Note:** Suzy Khimm, an author of this article, is related to
a resident at the Mary Manning Walsh Home.

   [1]: mailto:suzy.khimm@nbcuni.com
   [2]: https://www.nbcnews.com/health/coronavirus
   [3]: https://www.nbcnews.com/health/health-care/number-long-term-care-facilities-covid-19-cases-tops-400-n1172516
   [4]: https://www.statnews.com/2020/03/30/what-explains-coronavirus-lethality-for-elderly/
   [5]: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6912e1.htm
   [6]: https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2020-03-18/coronavirus-spread-nursing-homes
   [7]: https://www.courant.com/coronavirus/hc-news-coronavirus-nursing-home-fear-20200330-l7kg2wgmybbphehk7gu35a6nuq-story.html
   [8]: https://www.post-gazette.com/local/west/2020/03/31/Brighton-Rehab-and-Wellness-Center-coronavirus-cases-nursing-home-Kane-centers/stories/202003310157
   [9]: https://www.nola.com/news/coronavirus/article_a791485a-6aeb-11ea-824e-97fdeb421f21.
   [10]: https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/governors-plead-for-medical-equipment-from-federal-stockpile-plagued-by-shortages-and-confusion/2020/03/31/18aadda0-728d-11ea-87da-77a8136c1a6d_story.html
   [11]: https://www.vox.com/2020/3/29/21198627/biden-defense-production-act-masks-gowns-ppe
   [12]: https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/ceo-ventilator-maker-speaks-out-trump-invokes-defense-production-act-n1170881
   [13]: https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2020/03/24/scramble-medical-equipment-descends-into-chaos-us-states-hospitals-compete-rare-supplies/
   [14]: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:6649318169133494272/
   [15]: https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/why-widespread-coronavirus-testing-isnt-coming-anytime-soon
   [16]: https://coronavirus.health.ny.gov/system/files/documents/2020/03/22-doh_covid19_nh_alf_ilitest_032120.pdf
   [17]: https://smart.link/5d5ad16083f88
   [18]: https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/nursing-home-s-coronavirus-lockdown-keeps-wife-her-husband-58-n1154246
   [19]: https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/amid-coronavirus-outbreak-trump-administration-s-proposed-rollback-nursing-home-n1147661
   [20]: https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-to-pause-routine-nursing-home-inspections-11584981000