---
title: "Two years before coronavirus, CDC warned of a coming pandemic"
date: "2020-04-02T0901"
hero: "http://l2.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/x9nN6dIF9gZpmuNS01a.ng--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media-mbst-pub-ue1.s3.amazonaws.com/creatr-uploaded-images/2020-04/b2f8a2f0-7456-11ea-9fef-7f2556d918af"
---
[ ][1]

[][1]

WASHINGTON — Two years ago, some of the nation’s top public health
officials gathered in an auditorium at Emory University in Atlanta to
commemorate [the 1918 influenza pandemic][2] — also known as “the
Spanish flu” — which had killed as many as 40 million people as it swept
the globe.

Hosted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, [the daylong
conference on May 7, 2018,][3] was supposed to mine a calamity from the
past for lessons on the present and warnings for the future. There were
sessions titled “Nature Against Man” and “Innovations for Pandemic
Countermeasures.” Implicit was the understanding that while the 1918
pandemic was a singular catastrophe, conditions in the 21st century were
ideal for another outbreak.

And since there are six billion more people on the planet today than
there were in 1918, when the global population was only 1.8 billion, a
pathogen that is a less efficient killer than the Spanish flu could
nevertheless prove more deadly in absolute terms.

Long before the coronavirus emerged in Wuhan, China, and then soon
spread to nearly every country on Earth, the 2018 conference offered
proof that epidemiologists at the CDC and other institutions were aware
that a new pandemic was poised to strike. They discussed troubling
developments. They pointed to obvious gaps in the nation’s defenses.
They braced themselves for what they feared was coming.

“Are we ready to respond to a pandemic?” [asked Dr. Luciana Borio][4],
who was head of the since dissolved global health section of the
National Security Council.

Dr. Borio answered her own question: “I fear the answer is no.” She was
discussing the influenza but could have just as easily been referencing
the coronavirus, given the similarities between the two infections.

Among the organizers of the conference was Dr. Daniel Jernigan, who
heads the CDC’s flu division. He later hosted a webinar entitled “[100
Years Since 1918: Are We Ready for the Next Pandemic?][5]” Viewed today,
that presentation comes across as a disturbing preview of what the
entire world is facing in 2020, with close to a million people infected
with the coronavirus and more than 44,000 dead.

Dr. Daniel Jernigan. (Courtesy of the CDC)

More

Aside from Jernigan’s chillingly prophetic presentation, there were
plenty of warnings [during the May 7 symposium][6] that federal and
state authorities were not taking pandemic response seriously enough.

Top government officials gave these warnings mere steps from the
nation’s public health headquarters, raising questions about why that
warning was not heeded, given how unambiguous it was. “Our angst is
getting higher and higher,” Jernigan said as the conference came to a
close, adding that “our leadership is getting a lot of concerns.”
(Neither the CDC nor Jernigan responded to requests for comment.)

Other public health officials at the event worried that even after
outbreaks of SARS (2003), the swine flu (2009) and Ebola (2014), a
cavalier attitude towards infectious disease pervaded. “There often is a
feeling on the part of policymakers we’re talking to in Washington — but
also in other states — that something magical will happen when an
emergency risk occurs, that we’ll just be able to flip a switch and
we’ll be able to respond as best we could,” said former CDC associate
director John Auerbach, who now heads the Trust for America’s Health, a
nonprofit organization focused on medical preparedness.

Auerbach said that based on the organization’s latest report, it was
clear that “we have some vulnerability” to a pandemic on the state
level. Among the concerns the trust found was that only eight states and
the District of Columbia had a paid sick leave law, meaning that
millions of Americans were bound to continue working even after having
fallen ill.

The continuing lack of a coherent federal paid sick leave policy [has
been underscored by the coronavirus outbreak][7].

Patients wait in line for a COVID-19 test at Elmhurst Hospital Center in
New York City, March 25, 2020. (John Minchillo/AP)

More

Auerbach described conversations he’d had on Capitol Hill about pandemic
preparedness, and the diminishing funds devoted to that end. “You know,
don’t worry about that,” lawmakers were apparently telling him. “If
we’re not funding that at the federal level, the governors and the local
officials will increase the funding and compensate” for federal cuts, he
was apparently assured.

Except that wasn’t true, Auerbach said, pointing to statistics that
showed both states and local governments cutting public health funding,
potentially leaving the nation without the necessary defenses at any
level of government.

Two years later, cities and states are begging Washington for help, and
Americans are wondering how a nation fond of touting its health system
[as one without equal][8] could have found itself so poorly prepared for
a deadly plague.

President Trump has called the current coronavirus outbreak an
“unforeseen enemy” that “came out of nowhere.” He is correct in the
narrow sense that SARS-CoV-2, as the pathogen is formally known, is a
novel coronavirus, which means that its precise genomic sequence — [the
blueprint for its proteins][9] that batter the human body — have not
been glimpsed before. Existing armor in the form of vaccines could
therefore not protect against the assault.

But the coronavirus was hardly unforeseen. In fact, experts like
Jernigan have been warning about a new pandemic for years.

Jernigan’s webinar — which was not delivered during the May 7 seminar,
but on an unspecified later date — was co-hosted by Dr. Nancy
Messonnier, director of the National Center for Immunization and
Respiratory Diseases. She is a member of Trump’s coronavirus task force,
but her role was minimized after she [made dire warnings about the
pandemic][10].

Nancy Messonnier, director of the National Center for Immunization and
Respiratory Diseases. (Samuel Corum/Getty Images)

More

Despite his hesitations about the seriousness of the coronavirus threat,
Trump [has now largely conformed][11] to Messonnier’s concerns about the
coronavirus, which causes a disease called COVID-19. That disease has
killed about 4,000 Americans.

The coronavirus [attacks the lungs directly][12]; the flu is an
infection of the upper respiratory tract. But while the viruses act
differently, they spread from body to body [with similar quickness][13],
largely through close contact with sickened individuals, often by
sneezing and coughing.

In recent weeks, interest in the 1918 influenza has understandably
spiked, with people eager to understand [what can be learned from that
catastrophic outbreak][14].

Dr. Jernigan was making those very warnings two years ago, as is
apparent from the 34-slide presentation he delivered in 2018 on the 1918
pandemic.

That presentation is readily available online, and has been for the last
two years. It is not clear, however, if anyone from the White House has
viewed the presentation. If they did, they would glimpse a reality that
has become all too familiar to many Americans.

One slide warns that “human-adapted viruses” that originated in animals
“can cause efficient and sustained transmission.” Though he was speaking
specifically of influenza viruses, the same is true of the coronavirus,
which was also zoogenic, and is believed to have originated in [a wet
market][15] in the southeastern Chinese city of Wuhan.

Jernigan’s presentation then includes a discussion of how the 1918
spread, summarizing various well-known aspects of that era that
exacerbated the pandemic: World War I, crowded cities and a lack of
understanding of how viruses work.

The St. Louis Red Cross Motor Corps during the influenza epidemic of
1918. (Universal History Archive/Universal Images Group via Getty
Images)

More

The most relevant portions of Jernigan’s presentation come near the end,
in a section presciently titled “The Next Pandemic: Are We Ready?”

Jernigan came to a conclusion that has become common wisdom in recent
weeks: that the nation was primed but not prepared for a pandemic. He
describes factors that make a pandemic more likely, including a “more
crowded, more connected world.” Two years later, the ease of commercial
aviation would lead the coronavirus to spread from East Asia across the
world.

Another concern for Jernigan was that “the worlds of humans and animals
are increasingly converging,” especially as population growth results in
deforestation, [which makes zoogenic transmission more likely][16].
China’s animal markets have also come under increased scrutiny, with
some wanting them closed.

The presentation warned of “potential disruption” in supply chains of
food, energy and medical supplies, as well as of the health care system
itself. Those predictions appear to have been borne out in the United
States, with governors pleading for respirators and hospital
overcrowding leading to the construction of a coronavirus treatment
facility in the middle of Central Park. There have also been runs on
supermarkets, though wide-scale food shortages have not been reported.

Even more specific warnings follow, and seem especially haunting given
the harrowing images that have emerged from hospitals in New York. “Need
reusable respiratory protective devices,” Jernigan writes, in an
apparent reference to the N95 masks that have become a treasured
commodity for their role as a prophylactic against airborne viral
droplets. Jernigan also recommends “better ventilator access,”
anticipating what would be a major problem for cities like New York and
states like Washington.

A body wrapped in plastic is unloaded from a refrigerated truck and
handled by medical workers at the Brooklyn Hospital Center in New York
City. (John Minchillo/AP)

More

“Healthcare system could get overwhelmed in a severe pandemic,” Jernigan
writes, once again predicting accurately what has become the grim
reality of the coronavirus pandemic.

And while he praises the advent of new vaccine technologies, he notes
that it “takes too long to have vaccines available for pandemic
response.” Trump [initially promised][17] that both vaccines and
therapeutics would be quickly available, while public health officials
pointed out that both are many months away.

Moving to a more global view, Jernigan argued that “most countries do
not have robust pandemic plans and very few exercise response efforts.”
That became clear when the coronavirus attacked nations like Italy and
Iran, where the health systems became overwhelmed and thousands died.

A concluding slide summarized Jernigan’s main argument: “Efforts to
improve pandemic readiness and response are underway, however, many gaps
remain.”

The prevalent finding at the May 7 symposium on the 1918 pandemic was
that it would be far more costly to ignore the lessons of that
catastrophe than to institute the necessary measures to keep a new
outbreak at bay.

“We know what to do,” [said former CDC director Dr. Julie
Gerberding.][18] “We just have to do it.”

_____

[ _Click here_][19] _for the_[ _latest coronavirus news and
updates_][20] _. According to experts, people over 60 and those who are
immunocompromised continue to be the most at risk. If you have
questions, please reference the_[ _CDC_][21] _and_[ _WHO’s_][22]
_resource guides._

 **Read more:**

   [1]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus
   [2]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2720273/
   [3]: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/1918-commemoration/agenda.htm
   [4]: https://www.npr.org/2020/03/27/822728420/member-of-now-disbanded-national-security-council-pandemic-response-team-speaks
   [5]: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/1918-commemoration/pdfs/1918-pandemic-webinar.pdf
   [6]: https://rsph.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=a0abecbd-b0a0-4c5a-b2cf-a8c800dd44dd
   [7]: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/11/opinion/coronavirus-paid-sick-leave.html
   [8]: https://www.businessinsider.com/10-reasons-why-the-us-health-care-system-is-the-envy-of-the-world-2010-3
   [9]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2687780/
   [10]: https://www.statnews.com/2020/02/25/cdc-expects-community-spread-of-coronavirus-as-top-official-warns-disruptions-could-be-severe/
   [11]: https://news.yahoo.com/trump-sees-hard-days-ahead-in-coronavirus-fight-with-as-many-as-240000-americans-dead-030500269.html
   [12]: https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-the-coronavirus-attacks-your-body-11585343549
   [13]: https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/coronavirus/coronavirus-disease-2019-vs-the-flu
   [14]: https://time.com/5810695/spanish-flu-pandemic-coronavirus-ads/
   [15]: https://www.cnn.com/2020/03/05/asia/china-coronavirus-wildlife-consumption-ban-intl-hnk/index.html
   [16]: https://www.nationalgeographic.com/science/2019/11/deforestation-leading-to-more-infectious-diseases-in-humans/
   [17]: https://www.thedailybeast.com/trump-hints-coronavirus-vaccine-is-very-close-heres-the-scarier-reality
   [18]: https://twitter.com/LizBorkowski/status/993545682375016449
   [19]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus-covid-19-news-and-live-updates-120246923.html
   [20]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus/
   [21]: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/summary.html
   [22]: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019