---
title: "France Has Deadliest Virus Day as Infection Rate Slows in Spain"
date: "2020-04-03T1841"
hero: "http://l2.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/j8o9AgK8c8vozWbGcae6kQ--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en/bloomberg_politics_602/c72bf3c54c3c8ff79984259a3c5c4f0f"
---
(Bloomberg) -- France reported its deadliest day from the coronavirus
amid tentative signs that the pandemic may be easing in Spain and Italy.

The health ministry in Paris reported 588 hospital deaths, the most yet,
bringing the figure to 5,091 since the beginning of the outbreak. In
contrast, new infections slowed and fatalities declined in Spain for the
first time in four days, as infections stabilized in Italy. Together,
the three countries account for more than half the deaths worldwide in
the pandemic.

Austria could become one of the first in the region to loosen
restrictions that have shut down much of public life. Chancellor
Sebastian Kurz’s government will review data and consider a plan in
coming days to gradually restart the economy, the Austrian leader told
parliament in Vienna on Friday.

“Let’s not jump to conclusions because there are some positive signals,”
Kurz said. “I can promise you, if the numbers support it, we’ll do what
we can to return to normality step by step.”

Despite the pockets of improvement, governments have little leeway to
unwind lockdowns that have devasted the region’s economy. IHS Markit
said its monthly measure of services and manufacturing in the euro area
points to an annualized contraction of about 10%. With new business,
confidence and employment all down, there is “worse inevitably to come
in the near future,” it said.

Signs emerged that squabbling national leaders are coalescing around an
aid package. Euro-area finance ministers are set to agree on a
coronavirus aid package of 500 billion euros ($540 billion) next week,
the group’s leader, Portugal’s Mario Centeno told Sueddeutsche Zeitung.

Germany is planning to set up an extra 300 billion-euro aid program to
help small- and medium-sized companies, and Switzerland doubled the
amount of state credit guarantees for businesses to 40 billion francs
($41 billion).

In another positive development, German Chancellor Angela Merkel left
her precautionary quarantine. After ending 12 days in voluntary self-
isolation in Berlin, Merkel will continue to observe social-distancing
standards, government spokesman Steffen Seibert told reporters.

The chancellor, who this week prolonged a nationwide lockdown until
April 19, addressed the public Friday from the chancellery for the first
time since the quarantine, making a plea to stay home and avoid social
contact through the Easter holiday.

Even though a slight slowing of the spread of the disease offers “some
hope,” she said it was far too early to set a target date for easing
restrictions.

Europe’s longest-serving leader took center stage in Germany’s fight
against the virus with a rare televised address to the nation on March
18, in which she called the pandemic the country’s gravest challenge
since World War II.

Lockdown Review

Kurz, who wore a face mask before and after his speech, urged Austrians
to persevere with measures to limit contact between people and asked
them to refrain from celebrating the Easter holiday with large
gatherings of families and friends. His government will review virus
statistics with epidemiology experts on Sunday and present its plans on
Monday.

Growth in new infections in Austria has decreased to less than 5% per
day. The number of daily fatalities has fallen for four straight days
this week.

Spain’s Health Ministry on Friday reported 932 new deaths and 7,472
cases over the latest 24-hour period, both smaller gains than the
previous day. The dip in the daily figures could lead to less pressure
on overwhelmed hospitals. Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez’s government is
looking to extend the current lockdown for another two weeks beyond
April 11, Spanish media reported.

Italy reported 4,585 new infections, while there were 766 fatalities
compared with 760 in the previous 24-hour period, civil protection
authorities said at their daily news conference in Rome.

The pace of both new deaths and new infections has flattened out over
past days, even as the containment measures shuttering all non-essential
activities and banning most movement take a heavy toll on the economy.
In total, the country had 119,827 cases and 14,681 deaths.

In France, daily intensive-care admissions fell for a fourth day, adding
to signs that lockdown measures across Europe may be helping to bring
the outbreak under control. The total number of fatalities is 6,507,
including 1,416 deaths from nursing homes -- data that was partially
included for the first time on Thursday.

Despite Merkel returning to work, Germany’s fight against the outbreak
suffered a setback. Fatalities and confirmed cases rose by more than the
previous day on Friday, with total deaths climbing past 1,000. The
mortality rate is probably underestimated because of insufficient
testing, according to Lothar Wieler, president of the Robert Koch
Institute.

The country -- which has 84,794 infections, the third-most in Europe --
may still need additional intensive-care space, even after boosting
capacity by more than 40% since the crisis began, the head of Germany’s
public health authority said.

“My personal appraisal is that it will not be enough,” Wieler said at a
press briefing. “I would be happy to be wrong.”

For more articles like this, please visit us at [bloomberg.com][1]

[Subscribe now][2] to stay ahead with the most trusted business news
source.

©2020 Bloomberg L.P.

   [1]: https://www.bloomberg.com
   [2]: https://www.bloomberg.com/subscriptions/67obqkd5zdp5lj8/?utm_source=yahoo_usn