---
title: "Masquerade or needed aid? Virus help from China proves contentious"
date: "2020-04-01T1013"
hero: "http://l1.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/TIGxbRS_.rVqPnonVk90JA--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/http://media.zenfs.com/en_us/News/afp.com/970abd5e8d8cfb10e43dd63c014268d5efc72c21.jpg"
---
Paris (AFP) - China has stepped in to help the West tackle the
coronavirus crisis after managing to quell its own outbreak. But critics
view the aid, though indispensible, as part of a cynical ploy to project
Chinese influence.

As European and American healthcare systems creak under the strain,
China has offered millions of face masks and teams of medical experts.

As well as seeking to deflect criticism over initial Chinese missteps in
handling the epidemic, analysts say, the campaign is a public relations
opportunity in China's great power rivalry with the West and especially
the United States.

COVID-19 first emerged in a wild animal market late last year in the
Chinese city of Wuhan, but Beijing says the situation in China is now
under control with domestic cases dwindling to zero.

By contrast, Europe and the United States have become hotspots of the
pandemic with much of the West now in lockdown to curtail the spread of
the virus and limit the burden on health systems.

As governments scramble to cope, China is showering nations across the
globe -- including in the EU -- with masks, experts and equipment.

Austria, Belgium, France, Hungary, Italy, the Netherlands and Spain have
all received assistance.

China asked for discretion when the EU sent help in January but is
conversely trumpeting its own support in a "PR campaign without
precedent," according to political science expert Antoine Bondaz from
the Foundation for Strategic Research (FRS) in Paris.

The ideological battle around COVID-19 represents the latest flare-up of
tensions between China and the West, after spats over Beijing’s military
build-up in the South China Sea and over the expansion of tech giant
Huawei.

"(Beijing) seizes every national or international opportunity to show
the supposed 'superiority' of its system," Alice Ekman from the European
Union Institute for Security Studies (EUISS) told AFP.

\- 'Battle of narratives' -

EU Commission President Ursula von der Leyen initially expressed
gratitude on March 18 for Beijing's support.

But the warm tone has turned sour.

The bloc's foreign policy chief Josep Borrell last week called on Europe
to stand ready for a "struggle for influence" in a "global battle of
narratives".

"We must be aware there is a geopolitical component including a struggle
for influence through spinning and the 'politics of generosity’," the
newly-appointed Spanish diplomat said.

Borrell accused Beijing of initially covering up the outbreak, saying
this paved the way for its rapid, global spread.

"Armed with facts, we need to defend Europe against its detractors,"
Borrell said.

French Secretary of State for European Affairs Amelie de Montchalin told
French radio Sunday: "It's sometimes easier to spread propaganda, pretty
images and sometimes to exploit what is happening."

And French President Emmanuel Macron on Tuesday pointed to a massive
order of much-needed face masks from China as a wake-up call for
boosting domestic "independence".

"This crisis has taught us that the strategic nature of certain goods,
certain products, certain materials require European sovereignty," the
president said.

\- 'Original sin' -

Beijing has repeatedly expressed fury at US Secretary of State Mike
Pompeo's insistence on referring to COVID-19 as the "Wuhan virus" --
also to the consternation of some G7 counterparts who fear such a term
risks encouraging racism.

Chinese officials have also sought to sow doubt over the origin of the
virus.

On March 12, Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Lijian Zhao tweeted: "It
might be the US army who brought the epidemic to Wuhan. ... US owe us an
explanation!"

Beijing is seeking to wipe out its "original sin" both domestically and
internationally, researcher Francois Heisbourg told AFP.

In some countries, China's propaganda may find fertile ground, said
Ekman.

"Russia, Iran, Pakistan and Algeria amongst others wouldn't be
displeased to announce together (with China) a post-Western 'new world
order' when this crisis ends," the expert said.

On the European Union's very doorstep, aspiring bloc member Serbia has
already been drawn into the battle for influence.

"European solidarity does not exist. That was a fairy tale," President
Aleksandar Vucic said after the EU banned exports of medical supplies.

Vucic then praised the Chinese: "the only ones who can help us", and
addressed Chinese president Xi Jinping as his "brother" after Beijing
pledged to send help.

"Some people, in their heart of hearts, are very impressed with the
successes of Chinese governance," China's embassy in France tweeted last
Friday.

"They envy the efficiency of our political system and hate their own
countries' inability to do as well!"