---
title: "Lindsey Graham Calls on IG Horowitz to Testify in Further FISA Hearings after Scathing New Report"
date: "2020-03-31T1950"
hero: "http://l2.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/XPZsBH7dmnH71zMk1pW7Ag--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-US/the_national_review_738/c73638e5ccc4d23d19a2dc395a1d4b3f"
---
Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.) plans to
call DOJ inspector general Michael Horowitz to testify before congress
regarding his office’s audit of the FBI’s FISA application process,
which was released Tuesday and revealed potentially systematic abuses of
the transparency measures required of the Bureau when agents interact
with the FISA court.

“I have just been briefed on Inspector General Horowitz’s audit of FISA
applications involving American citizens. This random audit shows
discrepancies regarding verification of the information under the Woods
Procedures,” Graham said in a press release. “I intend to have Inspector
General Horowitz come to the Committee to explain his findings and
receive his recommendations about how to change the program.”

Horowitz’s latest report revealed that the FBI included “apparent errors
or inadequately supported facts” in all 29 FISA surveillance
applications filed between 2014 and 2019 and reviewed as part of the
audit.

The Woods Procedure dictates that the Justice Department verify the
accuracy of and provide evidentiary support for all facts stated in its
FISA application. The FBI is required to share with the FISA Court all
relevant information compiled in a Woods file when applying for a
surveillance warrant.

Four of the 29 applications lacked Woods files entirely, while the other
25 had “an average of about 20 issues per application reviewed, with a
high of approximately 65 issues in one application and less than 5
issues in another application.”

“FBI and NSD officials we interviewed indicated to us that there were no
efforts by the FBI to use existing FBI and NSD oversight mechanisms to
perform comprehensive, strategic assessments of the efficacy of the
Woods Procedures or FISA accuracy, to include identifying the need for
enhancements to training and improvements in the process, or increased
accountability measures,” the report states.

Horowitz recommended that the FBI begin to “systematically and regularly
examine” its Woods reviews to uncover abuse, beginning with a “physical
inventory to ensure that Woods Files exist for every FISA application
submitted to the FISC in all pending investigations.”

In a statement after the audit’s release, the DOJ said that it is
“committed to putting the Inspector General’s recommendations into
practice and to implementing reforms that will ensure all FISA
applications are complete and accurate.”

  

The findings are the latest in a growing trail of FBI abuses involving
the FISA Court. Horowitz appeared in front of the Senate Judiciary
Committee in December after finding “basic and fundamental errors” in
the FBI’s Crossfire Hurricane investigation of the 2016 Trump campaign,
and [blamed][1] the FBI chain of command for lacking oversight in the
FISA applications used to surveil Trump-campaign adviser Carter Page.

“The circumstances reflect a failure, as we outline in the report, not
just by those who prepared the applications, but also by the managers
and supervisors in the Crossfire Hurricane chain of command, including
FBI senior officials who were briefed as the investigation progressed,”
Horowitz said in his statement to Graham and the other senators.

Later in the hearing, Senator Josh Hawley (R., Mo.) said Horowitz’s
findings [showed][2] how the “the FBI effectively meddled in an ongoing
presidential campaign,” while other Republicans [acknowledged][3] that
they had not realized FISA abuse was a serious threat.

“As a national security hawk, I’ve argued with Mike Lee in the four-
and-a-half or five years that I’ve been in the Senate that stuff just
like this couldn’t possibly happen at the FBI and at the Department of
Justice,” Senator Ben Sasse (R., Neb.) said. “ . . . Mike Lee has warned
me for four-and-a-half years the potential for abuse in this space is
terrible and I constantly defended the integrity and the professionalism
of the bureau and of the department that you couldn’t have something
like this happen.”

Senator Thom Tillis (R., N.C.) echoed Sasse in recognizing Mike Lee’s
past criticisms of FISA.

“Because we’ve now seen the abuses we were warned about, you can smirk
again, you were right,” Tillis told the Utah Republican.

#### More from National Review

   [1]: https://www.nationalreview.com/news/horowitz-faults-fbi-chain-of-command-in-opening-senate-statement-for-lacking-effective-oversight-in-crossfire-hurricane-investigation/
   [2]: https://www.nationalreview.com/news/hawley-fbi-effectively-meddled-in-2016-election/
   [3]: https://www.nationalreview.com/news/following-ig-report-senate-republicans-plan-major-reforms-to-fisa-program/