---
title: "Navy says it can't empty Roosevelt amid coronavirus because of its weapons, nuclear reactor"
date: "2020-04-01T2221"
hero: "http://l1.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/lQpSnMWxqw77Jo01NUTgGg--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-us/usa_today_news_641/3fae474977c2be3c8f632ed59e00946a"
---
WASHINGTON – The coronavirus outbreak aboard the [USS Theodore Roosevelt
][1]escalated Wednesday as more sailors tested positive for the virus
and U.S. Navy officials scrambled to respond to the [desperate
evacuation plea ][2]from the aircraft carrier's captain.

As of midday Wednesday, 93 crew members had tested positive for the
virus, and 593 tested negative, Thomas Modly, acting Secretary of the
Navy, told reporters during a briefing Wednesday. There are
approximately 5,000 crew members on board.

"None of them are seriously ill," Modly said.

 **On board:**[Coronavirus cases climb as all sailors on USS Theodore
Roosevelt to be tested][1]

He said 24% of the crew, or about 1,200 sailors, had been tested so far,
and Navy officials were trying to take hundreds of sailors off the ship
for isolation and monitoring.

"We already have nearly 1,000 personnel off the ship right now. And in
the next couple of days, we expect to have about 2,700 of them off the
ship," Modly said.

But he also said the Navy could not leave the vessel empty, because it's
loaded with weapons and a nuclear reactor, among other dangerous
materials.

"It has munitions on it. It has expensive aircraft and has a nuclear
power plant," Modly said. "It requires a certain number of people on
that ship to maintain the safety and security of the ship."

He said the Navy would have to keep about 1,000 sailors on board to keep
the vessel's critical functions operational and conceded officials were
faced with "a delicate balance" between the safety of the crew and the
Navy's mission.

"You can't leave a nuclear reactor there, running without anybody on the
ship," he said.

 **Battle test:**[Coronavirus rips up soldiers' playbook, forces Army to
focus on health][3]

The infection numbers come two days after Navy Capt. Brett Crozier sent
an urgent letter to the U.S. Navy, asking officials to evacuate and
isolate the crew as cases of coronavirus infection increased on the
vessel.

Crozier said "decisive action" was required to prevent deaths from the
coronavirus, and that the sailors on board were currently unable to
comply with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines to
keep them safe because of the ship's close quarters.

The Navy first reported on March 24 that three sailors had tested
positive and been airlifted to a hospital in the Pacific. One day later,
five more sailors were diagnosed. By March 26, as the ship docked in
Guam for a scheduled visit, that number had jumped to 23 sailors.

"We are not at war, and therefore cannot allow a single Sailor to perish
as a result of this pandemic unnecessarily," Crozier wrote in Monday's
letter.

"Due to a warship's inherent limitations of space, we are not doing
this. The spread of the disease is ongoing and accelerating," he added.

The Navy announced last week that it would conduct testing on all of the
approximately 5,000 sailors aboard.

It's not clear why the service has tested only 24% of the crew so far.
Officials said there has also been a delay in getting results back, in
part because the samples had to be shipped to a Defense Department lab.

Modly and other Navy officials said they were trying to find hotel rooms
and other housing options in Guam for evacuated sailors.

Asked about Crozier's letter, Modly and others expressed concern that
his letter had been leaked to the media and suggested there had been
some sort of "communication's breakdown." The San Francisco Chronicle
first reported on the contents of the captain's missive.

"It's disappointing to have him say" that the Navy was not taking care
of its most trusted asset: the sailors, Modly said.

"However, at the same time, I know that that's not the truth," he said.
"We've been working very, very hard with the ship with this command
structure to ensure that that's exactly what we're doing. It's our
priority. We need those sailors to be safe. We need them to be healthy.
And we need that ship to be operational."

Navy Admiral Mike Gilday said Crozier has an "extraordinary
responsibility of command" and is accountable for the health and well-
being of the 4,865 sailors aboard the Roosevelt.

"He takes it very seriously," Gilday said. So if he believed the Navy
wasn't acting urgently enough, "then absolutely we need to know about
that and ... we need to adjust."

At a White House briefing Wednesday evening, Gilday said the Navy was
taking other precautions to prevent infections on other vessels. Among
other steps, he said sailors would go into quarantine for 14 days before
deployments or training exercises, to identify any infected personnel
before they board a Navy vessel.

Modly conceded it was a difficult and ever-changing situation. "A lot of
this is we're adjusting on the fly," he said.

 _Contributing: Jeanine Santucci_

 **Fact check:**[What's true and what's false about coronavirus?][4]

 _This article originally appeared on USA TODAY:[Coronavirus: Navy
leaves some sailors on Roosevelt to guard weapons][5]_

   [1]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/03/26/coronavirus-navy-test-all-sailors-roosevelt-cases-grow/2920634001/
   [2]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/03/31/covid-19-uss-theodore-roosevelt-captain-asks-navy-evacuate-crew/5097745002/
   [3]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/03/31/army-soldiers-focus-health-safety-amid-coronavirus/5097015002/
   [4]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/factcheck/2020/03/23/coronavirus-fact-check-whats-true-and-whats-false-covid-19/2898043001/
   [5]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/04/01/coronavirus-navy-sailors-roosevelt-guard-weapons-more-sick/5104785002/