---
title: "Pence says Italy is probably best comparison to U.S. now"
date: "2020-04-01T0438"
hero: "http://l2.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/t6fKowM6mtRLNA22OAxJsQ--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en/cbs_news_897/ca29b804771c2f2c134d533328e2f1f7"
---
Vice President Mike Pence said Wednesday that Italy is the "most
comparable area to the United States" at this point in terms of the
number of coronavirus cases and deaths, a grim statement reflecting the
nation's dire situation, since Italy currently leads the world in
COVID-19 deaths. On Monday, the White House said Americans should be
prepared for [at least 100,000 deaths][1] across the country, even with
strict mitigation measures.

"We think Italy may be the most comparable area to the United States, at
this point, for a variety of reasons, and so we built that modeling,"
Pence said Tuesday on CNN, as he explained how the White House arrived
at its mortality projection.

By noon Eastern, Italy reported 12,428 deaths, compared with 4,102 in
the U.S., according to Johns Hopkins data. Italy has many fewer
confirmed cases â€” 105.792, compared to the United States' 190,089.
Deaths lag the number of cases, and Italy has reported the highest
number of deaths in the world from COVID-19.

On Tuesday, the White House's Coronavirus Task Force gave a lengthy,
somber briefing that ran 2 hours and 11 minutes. President Trump told
reporters at the briefing that the U.S. needs to be prepared for a "hell
of a bad two weeks," as the number of cases and deaths increase. The
president, who has been eager to return Americans to work, sounded a
different tone Tuesday, as his team painted the grim reality of coming
deaths.

But Mr. Trump, who Tuesday night, insisted COVID-19 is nothing like the
flu, hasn't always seen the comparison this way.

"This is like a flu," Mr. Trump said in late February. He has also
compared the number of coronavirus deaths to deaths caused by the
seasonal flu.

In his CNN interview, Pence insisted the president's tone has been
consistent.

"I don't believe the president has ever belittled the threat of the
coronavirus," Pence claimed.

[2 dead, dozens have COVID-19 at California nursing home][2]

[Protesters show up at packed Louisiana church][3]

[Germany's low coronavirus death rate][4]

   [1]: http://www.cbsnews.com/news/coronavirus-task-force-update-covid-19-response-watch-live-stream-today-2020-03-31/?ftag=YHF4eb9d17
   [2]: http://www.cbsnews.com/videos/2-dead-dozens-have-covid-19-at-california-nursing-home?ftag=YHFaf537c7
   [3]: http://www.cbsnews.com/videos/protesters-show-up-at-packed-louisiana-church?ftag=YHFaf537c7
   [4]: http://www.cbsnews.com/videos/germanys-low-coronavirus-death-rate?ftag=YHFaf537c7