---
title: "Flattening the curve on coronavirus: What California and Washington can teach the world"
date: "2020-04-02T1304"
hero: "http://l.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/fo6g_hYywbsJdgg_zD3pXA--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media-mbst-pub-ue1.s3.amazonaws.com/creatr-uploaded-images/2020-04/d00a6ac0-74f3-11ea-9faf-bd3f758411a3"
---
[ ][1]

[][1]

LOS ANGELES — The numbers have been devastating. More [than 215,000
confirmed COVID-19 cases across the United States][2], with a staggering
84,000 in New York alone. A death toll — more than 5,000 at last count —
that has already surpassed 9/11’s. And grim new estimates from the Trump
administration that [predict the deadly pathogen could eventually kill
between 100,000 and 240,000 Americans][3] — assuming [the U.S. does
everything right][4].

Yet in recent days, a few bright spots have started to flicker amid the
statistical gloom. They come from various sources: internet-connected
thermometers; smartphone GPS data; a study by private researchers in
Bellevue, Wash.; state-by-state projections from the University of
Washington; [reports from hospitals in the San Francisco Bay Area][5].

All of this new information points to the same hopeful, if tentative,
conclusion. In areas of America that caught the coronavirus early in its
trajectory — and quickly implemented the sort of strict, sweeping social
distancing measures recommended by public health officials — the curve
may be starting to bend. The virus may be starting to spread more
slowly. Staying home may be starting to work.

The two states to watch are Washington and California.

“California and Washington reacted very early to this,” Dr. Deborah
Birx, the administration’s coronavirus response coordinator, [told
reporters Tuesday during a White House briefing][6]. “Washington state,
early, about two weeks before New York or New Jersey ... California, a
week before New York or New Jersey, really talked to their communities
and decided to mitigate before they started seeing this number of cases.
And now we know that makes a big difference.”

The first known COVID-19 case in the U.S. was identified near Seattle,
and it was there that the virus claimed 37 of its first 50 U.S. victims.
After discovering in late February that residents with no known exposure
or history of foreign travel were becoming infected, officials began to
urge social distancing. Within a week, people were starting to work from
home and seniors were being encouraged to stay indoors. On March 11,
Gov. Jay Inslee banned large events in three Seattle-area counties and
the city’s public schools announced they would close.

Five days later, the Bay Area stunned the nation when health officers in
six counties jointly ordered residents to shelter in place. Eleven other
California counties soon joined the order, and on March 19 it was
expanded statewide by Gov. Gavin Newsom.

California Gov. Gavin Newsom and Washington Gov. Jay Inslee. (Rich
Pedroncelli/Pool via AP, Amanda Snyder/The Seattle Times/Pool via AP)

More

In contrast, it took New York state until March 22 to implement a
similar order. Playgrounds in New York City [didn’t close until
Wednesday][7].

“People should go out and continue to live life, should go out to
restaurants,” New York Mayor Bill de Blasio said on March 11.

A new [“social distancing scoreboard”][8] by New York technology company
[Unacast][9] suggests that people are now following these shelter-in-
place orders. Using smartphone GPS data to compare how far residents of
every U.S. county travel each day, the scorecard awards New York,
California and Washington high grades for cutting average mobility by
more than 40 percent since the start of the outbreak. In fact, mobility
has declined by more in Manhattan (72 percent) than in San Francisco (65
percent), Seattle (56 percent) or Los Angeles (46 percent).

But timing is everything during a pandemic, and it appears the virus had
already spread widely in the nation’s largest, most densely populated
city before the lockdown. Kinsa Health, which produces internet-
connected thermometers, has been compiling and analyzing up to 162,000
daily temperature readings since COVID-19 struck the U.S., as the New
York Times recently [reported][10], adapting its software to detect
spikes of “atypical fever” that do not correlate with historical flu
patterns and are likely attributable to the coronavirus.

According to [Kinsa’s national map][11], overall fevers have fallen or
held steady in every county in the country over the last week — a sign
that stay-at-home measures, which now cover more than 250 million
Americans, are having an effect. Yet in both Manhattan and Brooklyn, the
level of atypical illness over the last month registered as “high,”
likely because so many people were already infected (and infectious)
prior to social distancing. Meanwhile, the level of atypical illness was
either low or mild in the Bay Area. Around Seattle, the level was either
mild or moderate. And in Los Angeles, Kinsa lists the cumulative level
of atypical illness as “none.”

Patients wait for a COVID-19 test at Elmhurst Hospital Center, in
Queens, N.Y., on March 25. (John Minchillo/AP)

More

Since 2018, Kinsa’s [predictions have routinely been two to three weeks
ahead][12] of those of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
which relies on data from doctor office visits instead. Kinsa’s listing
doesn’t mean no one in L.A. has COVID-19; according to [the latest
numbers from the Los Angeles Times][13], L.A. County has logged more
than 3,000 cases and 50 deaths so far, and both of those numbers will
continue to grow. But because there’s a lag between the time someone
catches the virus and starts showing up in the data — it can take up to
two weeks to experience symptoms, up to 10 more days before
hospitalization is required, and another two or three weeks before the
case resolves, with either recovery or death — a lower level of atypical
illness in a region that started sheltering in place several weeks ago
suggests there may be fewer pre-social-distancing cases lurking in the
pipeline. It also suggests that when the peak does arrive, it will
likely be lower than New York’s.

This hypothesis may be starting to bear out. [Preliminary statistical
models][14] provided to public officials in Washington state by the
Institute for Disease Modeling, a private research group in Bellevue,
suggest that the spread of the virus has slowed in the Seattle area in
recent days. One month ago, each infected person was spreading the virus
to an average of 2.7 other people; now that number appears to have been
cut roughly in half, to 1.4.

Meanwhile, “the number of new cases diagnosed today [in San
Francisco][15] is about two-thirds of what it was four or five days ago,
which means the slope of the increase is lower than it was, which, to
me, is reasonably good evidence of some flattening of the curve,” [Dr.
Bob Wachter][16], a professor and chair of the Department of Medicine at
the University of California, San Francisco, [told the New York Times on
Tuesday][17]. “If this thing was expanding in the way epidemics do when
they’re not being mitigated or addressed, the growth [would be]
exponential.”

As a result, [the death toll][18] has been doubling every seven or eight
days in Washington and every four or five days in California — far
slower than in New York, where it’s been doubling every two or three
days. (Deaths are not a perfect measure of the virus’s spread. But
they’re a far better way to compare places than confirmed cases, which
reflect different levels of testing throughout the country.)

Barriers block the beach area in Redondo Beach, Calif., after Los
Angeles County ordered parks, trails and beaches closed on March 28.
(Patrick T. Fallon/Reuters)

More

Cases will continue to rise in California and Washington, and the death
toll will continue to climb. Things will get worse before they get
better. But the situation on the West Coast will likely not be as bad as
it would have otherwise been — or as bad as it still could be elsewhere.
According to [new projections, the Institute for Health Metrics and
Evaluation at the University of Washington][19] estimates that as many
as 177,000 Americans may die from COVID-19 by August (again, if the
country does everything right). Yet the same model says that only 11,000
of those deaths would occur in California, America’s most populous
state, and that only 2,500 of them would occur in Washington (the site
of America’s first outbreak). New York, by comparison, is on track to
suffer 22,000 coronavirus deaths — twice as many as California and
nearly 10 times as many as Washington.

Assuming its model is correct, the IHME also projects that neither
California nor Washington is likely to exceed its hospital resource
capacity. New York, by contrast, has already exceeded it, and is likely
to continue to need many more hospital beds, intensive care beds and
ventilators than it had before the pandemic.

“There’s an indication that maybe all the sheltering in place and doing
that early helped bend the curve here, and it might not be as bad,” Eric
Holdeman, the former director of King County (Seattle) disaster
management, [recently explained.][20] “And maybe we can avoid what New
York is going to experience in the next 10 days to two weeks, which is
going to look like Italy and look like Spain.”

The takeaway for the rest of the country is clear: Move fast, act
decisively and don’t let up. (Government models released Wednesday
[showed that as many as 5,000 Californians could die per week if
restrictions are relaxed too soon][21].) Several large states, including
Texas, Georgia, Florida and Pennsylvania, had yet to issue statewide
shelter-in-place orders as recently as Tuesday — even though [deaths are
doubling faster][18] there than in California. The death tolls in Ohio,
Illinois, Michigan, New Jersey and Louisiana are rising at similarly
rapid rates.

In some places — such as the emerging hot spots of Detroit, Chicago,
Miami, Atlanta and New Orleans — it may be too late to prevent hospitals
from being overwhelmed. Everywhere else should heed the lesson of
California and Washington.

“If you wait till you see it,” Birx said Tuesday, “it’s too late.”

_____

[ _Click here_][22] _for the_[ _latest coronavirus news and
updates_][23] _. According to experts, people over 60 and those who are
immunocompromised continue to be the most at risk. If you have
questions, please reference the_[ _CDC_][24] _and_[ _WHO’s_][25]
_resource guides._

 **Read more:**

   [1]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus
   [2]: https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html
   [3]: https://news.yahoo.com/trump-sees-hard-days-ahead-in-coronavirus-fight-with-as-many-as-240000-americans-dead-030500269.html
   [4]: https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2020/04/01/824744490/5-key-facts-the-white-house-isnt-saying-about-their-covid-19-projections
   [5]: https://brokeassstuart.com/2020/03/30/bay-area-curve-stays-flattened-ucsf-er-stays-quiet/
   [6]: https://www.foxnews.com/health/birx-praises-california-washington-for-coronavirus-response-says-ny-nj-lagged
   [7]: https://nypost.com/2020/04/01/cuomo-closes-all-nyc-playgrounds-to-stop-coronavirus-spread/
   [8]: https://www.unacast.com/covid19/social-distancing-scoreboard
   [9]: http://www.unacast.com/
   [10]: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/30/health/coronavirus-restrictions-fevers.html
   [11]: https://healthweather.us/?mode=Trends
   [12]: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/16/health/smart-thermometers-flu.html
   [13]: https://www.latimes.com/projects/california-coronavirus-cases-tracking-outbreak/
   [14]: http://www.documentcloud.org/documents/6821542-Social-Distancing-Mobility-Reductions-Reduced.html
   [15]: https://www.sfdph.org/dph/alerts/coronavirus.asp
   [16]: https://medicine.ucsf.edu/people/robert-wachter
   [17]: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/01/us/coronavirus-california-new-york-testing.html
   [18]: https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/03/21/upshot/coronavirus-deaths-by-country.html
   [19]: https://covid19.healthdata.org/projections
   [20]: https://mynorthwest.com/1797011/king-county-excellent-response-coronavirus/
   [21]: https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2020-04-01/california-coronavirus-deaths-social-distancing
   [22]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus-covid-19-news-and-live-updates-120246923.html
   [23]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus/
   [24]: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/summary.html
   [25]: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019