---
title: "One country is refusing to shut down to stop the coronavirus"
date: "2020-03-31T1635"
hero: "http://l2.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/mMsaqEaWAwYHoko6f5dcMQ--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-US/nbc_news_122/24e872919e714c7bbcdc853351c5ef8a"
---
MOSCOW — While officials from Montreal to Moscow have placed populations
under some form of lockdown designed to slow the spread of the
[coronavirus][1], one man continues to hold firm to the notion that the
rest of the world has lost its mind: Belarusian President Alexander
Lukashenko.

“It is better to die on your feet than live on your knees!” Lukashenko
[told a Belarusian television reporter][2] Saturday when asked whether
the coronavirus could stop him from hitting the rink for a propaganda-
filled hockey game.

Image: Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko plays in a hockey game
in Minsk on Saturday. (Andrey Pokumeiko / BelTA / via Reuters)

More

“Me? Why? I don’t understand. There is no virus here,” Lukashenko said,
gesturing around the arena. “This is a refrigerator, it is the best
thing for your health. Sport, especially on ice, is better than any
antiviral medication. It is the real thing.”

Lukashenko, one of the longest-serving leaders in the former Soviet
Union, has been in power for over 25 years. His tenure has seen brutal
crackdowns on dissent.

[ _ **Full coverage of the coronavirus outbreak**_][3]

Both Lukashenko and his nation, Belarus, have played second fiddle to
their much larger, and much more powerful neighbor: Vladimir Putin’s
Russia. The two nations have a loosely controlled internal border and
shared customs space — undermining his claims to sovereignty.

Lukashenko for weeks now has downplayed the threat of COVID-19. Instead
of preparing his nation for the worst, he has routinely and openly
questioned the world’s response to the virus, using the word “psychosis”
to describe the global response several times since early March.

Young fans react during a Belarus soccer match on March 27. Longtime
Belarus President Alexander Lukashenko is proudly keeping soccer and
hockey arenas open even though most sports around the world have shut
down because of the coronavirus pandemic. (Sergei Grits / AP)

More

Meanwhile, he has made a point of keeping factories, stores, cultural
and sporting events open. The Belarusian Health Ministry has reported
just 152 cases of the coronavirus.[ Neighboring Russia][4] reported
1,836 as of Monday.

Two weeks ago, he insisted that Belarus has survived worse than the
novel pandemic hitting the world. Saunas, vodka and tending to the
fields were the best remedy for those who fear the spread of the virus,
he said.

“The tractor will heal everyone,” he said, “the fields heal everyone.”

Lukashenko’s folk remedies for COVID-19 fall well in line with
assurances issued by other post-Soviet leaders. Gurbanguly
Berdymukhamedov, president of Turkmenistan, consulted his own writings
on his nation’s plant life and declared a cure to be found in a local
herb.

 _ **Download the**_[ _ **NBC News app**_][5] _ **for full coverage of
the coronavirus outbreak**_

In his own way, Putin has also downplayed the threat of the virus —
insisting for weeks that the situation was well under control. But Putin
began an about-face last week in a national address asking Russians to
stay home.

Lukashenko seems to have been unfazed by Putin’s admission that the
situation is more serious than it first appeared.

“This psychosis has crippled national economies almost everywhere in the
world,” Lukashenko said while touring a factory Friday. “Even the
Russian Federation that is similar to us has started closing
businesses.”

   [1]: https://www.nbcnews.com/health/health-news/live-blog/live-coronavirus-updates-u-s-death-toll-passes-3-000-n1172706
   [2]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4IwEJPrPVp4&feature=emb_title
   [3]: https://www.nbcnews.com/health/coronavirus
   [4]: https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/coronavirus-russia-s-low-infection-numbers-viewed-skeptically-n1166101
   [5]: https://smart.link/5d5ad16083f88