---
title: "Liberty University students choose sides after fallout from coronavirus reporting"
date: "2020-03-31T2230"
hero: "http://l.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/F7qGyv.u81sDmpM2xGGd3A--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media-mbst-pub-ue1.s3.amazonaws.com/creatr-uploaded-images/2020-03/c6e573c0-739c-11ea-b71f-43acd32207fb"
---
The New York Times reported this week that almost a dozen Liberty
University students have come down with COVID-19 symptoms since the
[school reopened][1] last week, according to a bombshell [article][2]
published Sunday that cites a local physician in Lynchburg, Va., where
the evangelical university is situated.

“We’ve lost the ability to corral this thing,” Dr. Thomas W. [Eppes Jr.
said][2] he told Liberty University president Jerry Falwell Jr.,
according to the article. The Times identified Eppes as the head of the
school’s student health service, but he does not appear on the Liberty
University website and a school spokesman told Yahoo News he has no
official connection to the university. Dr. Eppes did not return a call
to Yahoo News for comment.

Many students at the university said they were unconcerned about the
risks of returning to classes.

According to the Times, three students were reportedly referred to a
local hospital for testing, while eight others were told to self-
isolate.

But Liberty University officials have since pushed back on these claims,
calling the Times story “fake news” in a piece posted to the [school
website][3] Sunday night. “The New York Times published a false and
misleading story on March 29 claiming that Liberty University ‘students
started getting sick’ after students returned to campus from spring
break,” the post reads. “The truth is a far different story.”

The post continued, “despite the Times’ sensational headline and story
lead, in fact, Liberty is only aware of three off-campus students who
were sufficiently symptomatic to qualify for COVID-19 testing, two of
which did not leave Lynchburg for Spring Break and one of which tested
negative during Spring Break.”

On Monday, the Liberty University’s official Twitter account published a
tweet that read, “So sad the failing New York Times had to quote local
Dr. with no official role at LU about COVID-19 only for clickbait when
it knew his data was incomplete and unofficial.”

Liberty spokesman Scott Lamb declined an interview with Yahoo News on
this story, but on Monday evening he offered the school’s latest
statement, which claims that 1,045 students remained on Liberty’s campus
as of Sunday night. There are three students (both residential and
online) who have been tested for COVID-19, of which one — a recent
graduate residing locally with family — tested positive, the school
said. There are an additional five students on campus who are self-
quarantining because of symptoms or due to recent travel to New York
City.

Also on Monday, Virginia Gov. Ralph Northam issued a stay-at-home order
for the state effective until June 10. Virginia residents may only leave
their home to seek medical attention, work, care for family or household
members, obtain groceries and prescriptions, and engage in outdoor
activity. The order also bans gatherings of more than 10 people. Liberty
says the school will close down its remaining in-person instruction and
inform its residential students of new travel restrictions and
guidelines.

It’s an entirely new climate with new rules for students at Liberty
University. And it’s a scenario many critics saw coming when Falwell
welcomed students and faculty back to campus last week amid the
country’s worsening outbreak of the coronavirus.

One outspoken undergraduate voice, senior Calum Best, who also chose to
stay on campus, questions if Liberty students can stay safe. “It’s
theoretically possible to have an open college campus with a small
number of residential students and keep everyone isolated,” Best told
Yahoo News. “I thought this might be the case at Liberty. It’s been
disappointing since then to see the number of students breaking social
distancing guidelines, but I still think that it’s possible to be safe.”

Best was quoted in the Times piece, calling out Falwell and his
administration’s attempts to quiet dissent. “The only real question of
fact was whether Dr. Eppes did actually say to the New York Times
reporter that 12 students were symptomatic,” Best said. He added that in
spite of the school’s response to the Times article, “the piece remains
rock solid and worth standing by, especially the parts about President
Falwell’s misleading communication [and] students breaking social
distancing.”

Falwell, now dealing with fallout from the Times piece, maintains he has
it under control. “Liberty will be notifying the community as deemed
appropriate and required by law,” Falwell said Sunday. He added that any
student now returning to campus would be required to self-quarantine for
14 days.

The news has shaken critics, but students like computer science major
Clayton Didinsky say that, despite the outside chatter, they will
believe what the university tells them.

“When it comes to either choosing to believe my school or the New York
Times, I'm going to choose my school just because they have no reason to
lie to us,” Didinsky told Yahoo News. “But I overall think that it's a
messy situation. I think that Liberty really should just communicate
with their students [better].”

Didinsky chose to drive back home to California when the school reopened
last week. He [did not agree][1] with Falwell’s decision to reopen
campus because he felt it endangered students like himself who suffer
from preexisting health conditions. (Didinsky has mitochondrial
disease.) He says the decision isn’t just Falwell’s. “I think there's a
lot more that goes into it than a lot of us see,” Didinsky said. “And I
think that overall, Jerry probably gets a big say in it.”

For other students, like track and field standout Jaqueze Durham of
Orlando, Fla., staying on campus was the best option. “I just think it's
easier for us to be here than be at home,” Durham said. “I come from a
house of 10 siblings and I wouldn't want to give it to my 2-year-old
sister or give it to my older brother who has children.”

Durham admitted that he was concerned when he saw the Times piece, but
reasoned that “you can get it anywhere.” He feels confident that the
university is doing what it can to ensure student safety with the rules
in place.

Freshman Ethan Hale also chose to stay on campus and says he questions
the news reports that students have coronavirus symptoms. “I am living
on campus and I'm going to probably get the news first or I would hope
to at least,” Hale said. “I don't know exactly if those are facts or
rumors.”

Regardless, Hale says staying on campus was what was best for him
because going to his home in Fairbanks, Alaska, to study online would
have made school nearly impossible. “For me, it was the time difference
and the fact that I have six siblings,” said Hale. “It’s the [lack of]
space in my house and I wouldn't really be able to get work done for an
8 a.m. class that I'd have to be there at 4 a.m. ... So for me, this
space that I have here is really great because it's like I can do my
work and focus on other things.”

Hale says that ultimately students need to decide what is best for them.

“It's a matter of choice,” Hale said. “Be safe. If you feel like you
were being safe on campus, stay on campus. Make those smart decisions.
But people who are on the outside, I don't think should be putting that
feedback back in because it's not their decision.”

_____

 **Read more from Yahoo News:**

   [1]: https://news.yahoo.com/liberty-university-students-split-over-decision-to-reopen-school-005108355.html
   [2]: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/29/us/politics/coronavirus-liberty-university-falwell.html
   [3]: http://www.liberty.edu/news/index.cfm?PID=18495&MID=379359