---
title: "Extremists see global chaos from virus as an opportunity"
date: "2020-04-02T1619"
hero: "http://l1.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/0SaQIcTSc8iXKEb1alF2mg--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en/ap.org/b5f5fee1387f4d9c3826da8a83413b66"
---
JOHANNESBURG (AP) — Both the Islamic State group and al-Qaida see the
coronavirus as a threat, but some of their fighters also see the
upheaval from the pandemic as an opportunity to win over more supporters
and strike harder than before.

Messages from the Islamic extremist groups show concern about the virus
mixed with bravado, asserting that it is punishment for non-Muslims
while also urging followers to repent and take care of themselves.

Al-Qaida suggested in a statement Tuesday that non-Muslims use their
time in quarantine to learn about Islam. But in a sharp commentary in
its al-Naba newsletter in mid-March, IS urged followers to show no mercy
and launch attacks in this time of crisis.

In a commentary Tuesday, the International Crisis Group warned that the
pandemic threatens the global solidarity that is key to fighting
extremists, “allowing the jihadists to better prepare spectacular terror
attacks.”

Though analysts said it was too soon to say which attacks can be blamed
on militants exploiting the coronavirus, Islamic extremists in late
March carried out their [deadliest assault yet][1] against the military
of Chad, a significant contributor to Africa’s growing counterterrorism
efforts, killing at least 92 soldiers near the border with Nigeria and
Niger.

In Egypt, two military officials reported a spike in IS attacks in March
in the restive northern part of the Sinai Peninsula. They spoke on
condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to brief the
media.

While Syria and Iraq have seen no uptick in attacks by IS since the
virus spread there, the pandemic has prompted the U.S.-led coalition to
halt training activities in Iraq amid a planned pullout from several
bases.

There are signs elsewhere that the U.S., British and other militaries
are pulling back because of the virus, leaving a possible opening for
the extremists.

That’s a danger in Africa’s hot spots of the Sahel, the Lake Chad region
and Somalia, where the U.S. military already worried allies in recent
months by [contemplating cuts][2] to focus on threats from China and
Russia.

“Any state that was interested in pulling back in Africa will take the
opportunity to do so,” said Clionadh Raleigh, executive director of the
Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project, which tracks extremists’
activities worldwide. “That will be unbelievably bad.”

A U.S. Africa Command spokeswoman, Lt. Christina Gibson, told The
Associated Press that “while the size and scope of some AFRICOM
activities have been adjusted to ensure the safety and protection of
forces — both U.S. and partner nation — our commitment to Africa
endures.” She did not give details but said about 5,200 forces are on
the continent.

The British army mission in Kenya, which provides counterterrorism
training and other skills, this week announced that all army families
are returning to the U.K. because of the virus.

But France’s largest overseas military mission, Barkhane in West
Africa’s sprawling Sahel region south of the Sahara Desert, is keeping
its 5,100 troops there, the French Defense Ministry said.

Four French soldiers with Barkhane have tested positive for the
coronavirus, a spokesman said Thursday, adding that operations have not
been affected. They were the first in the mission to be infected.

African military units, already stretched thin and under attack, are
likely to take protective measures as the virus threatens their ranks.

In Nigeria, which has struggled against the Boko Haram extremist group
and an assertive IS-linked offshoot, the military has called for
suspending much of its activities including large gatherings and
training.

A leaked memo signed by Nigerian army's policy chief says its vehicles
might have to be used for mass burials or transferring the sick to
hospitals.

While security forces are targets, under-guarded prisons could be too,
said Laith Alkhouri, a counterterrorism adviser who researches
extremists in West Africa. Both IS and al-Qaida-linked fighters have
turned the Sahel into Africa's most urgent extremism crisis, and even
have engaged in some [unprecedented ][3]cooperation.

Their fighters are likely to exploit the pandemic by accusing
governments of mismanaging the crisis to try to win popular support, he
said.

Some extremist groups are showing signs that, like the rest of the
world, they are trying to understand the coronavirus and respond.

In Somalia, the al-Qaida-linked al-Shabab held a rare five-day meeting
of its leaders in March that discussed the virus. In a communique, the
group recognized its “emergency threat” to the world, including Muslims.

An al-Shabab spokesman later told the AP it was too soon to comment on
whether the group would heed a U.N. plea to halt attacks, which have
continued, or whether it would allow health workers access to areas it
controls.

In Afghanistan, the Taliban have gone even further, putting out videos
on disinfection and photos of its fighters handing out face masks and
soap. It also has offered security guarantees to any aid group assisting
victims of the virus or helping to stop its spread.

Taliban spokesman Zabihullah Mujahed told the AP that “if, God forbid,
the outbreak happens in an area where we control the situation, then we
can stop fighting in that area."

___

Kathy Gannon in Islamabad, Pakistan; Haruna Umar in Maiduguri, Nigeria;
Sam Mednick in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso; Abdi Guled and Tom Odula in
Nairobi, Kenya; Baba Ahmed in Bamako, Mali; Samy Magdy and Maamoun
Youssef in Cairo; Samya Kullab in Baghdad and Sylvie Corbet and Angela
Charlton in Paris contributed.

___

Follow AP news coverage of the coronavirus pandemic at
<https://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak> and
<https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak>

   [1]: https://apnews.com/3bf3805316845354690bb2db7168e0a6
   [2]: https://apnews.com/df6c018f58c532d0c916d4fb339ccbe1
   [3]: https://apnews.com/f30c35fe93f185d68b4ee553d5a9426f