---
title: "Trump Uses Coronavirus Briefing to Warn About Drug Cartels"
date: "2020-04-01T2348"
hero: "http://l2.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/7bpEJyiCGgKD0tkE3Djulw--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-US/thedailybeast.com/ad9cc1775488106e7b2e2716a3d5aebb"
---
A day after finally [appearing to acknowledge the gravity of the
coronavirus pandemic][1] and the [massive loss of American lives][2],
President Donald Trump began his latest White House briefing on
Wednesday by shifting the focus to drug cartels and at one point
boasting about being “number one” on Facebook.

“As governments and nations focus on the coronavirus, there's a growing
threat that cartels, criminals, terrorists and other malign actors will
try to exploit the situation for their own gain, and we must not let
that happen," Trump said. “We will never let that happen.”

Trump then announced that the United States was starting “enhanced
counter narcotics operations in the western hemisphere,” in an effort to
“protect the American people from the deadly scourge of illegal
narcotics.”

“We must not let the drug cartels exploit the pandemic to threaten
American lives,” Trump said.

The president also used the briefing to return to some earlier themes
that have proven popular among his base: the border wall and “all the
caravans” of undocumented immigrants he recalled had tried to travel to
the U.S.

At one point, when asked about reports of a surge in domestic violence
amid the pandemic, he appeared to mishear the question as instead being
about “[Mexican violence][3].”

When asked at one point during the briefing about tweeting, Trump
couldn’t keep from patting himself on the back over his social media
following.

“It's social media, it gets out. I have hundreds of millions of people,”
Trump said. “Number one on Facebook. Did you know I was number one on
Facebook? I just found out I'm number one on Facebook. I thought that
was very nice, for whatever it means. ”

[White House Trots Out Grim Death Models to Drive Home Social
Distancing][4]

It was left uncertain in what category the president believed he was
number one.

During Wednesday’s briefing, Trump continued to back away from
[comparing the novel coronavirus to the flu][5], despite having
continued to make the association last week while he fretted about the
American economy.

When asked what changed his thinking, Trump said it was the severity of
the virus and “the violence of it.”

“I think also in looking at the way the contagion, it is contagious,
nobodies ever seen anything like this where large groups of people all
of a sudden just by being in the presence of somebody have it,” Trump
said. "The flu has never been like that. Flu is contagious but nothing
like we've ever seen here.”

“If it hits the right person, that person's in deep trouble,” Trump
said.

Both Republican and Democratic state leaders across the country have
issued stay-at-home orders, but the president was unwilling Wednesday to
force that on state leaders, despite some governors avoiding taking the
statewide action until outcry built in their states.

"There are some states that are different," Trump said. "There are some
states that don't have much of a problem. Well, they don't have (the)
problem. They don't have thousands of people that are
positive...thousands of people that even think they might have it, or
hundreds of people in some cases."

So instead Trump called for "a little bit of flexibility."

“A state in the Midwest, or if Alaska, as an example, doesn't have a
problem, it's awfully tough to say “close it down,” Trump said.

He also continued to complain about inheriting “a very broken system”
when officials were asked about issues with testing.

“We inherited bad tests,” Trump said. “We really inherited bad tests.
These are horrible tests and it was all broken and we fixed it. And
we're doing millions of tests.”

[Read more at The Daily Beast.][6]

[Get our top stories in your inbox every day. Sign up now!][7]

[Daily Beast Membership: Beast Inside goes deeper on the stories that
matter to you. Learn more.][8]

   [1]: https://www.thedailybeast.com/trump-literally-laughed-at-how-he-can-game-the-press-with-his-new-tone?ref=home
   [2]: https://www.thedailybeast.com/trump-warns-of-very-very-painful-next-two-weeks?ref=wrap
   [3]: https://twitter.com/VeraMBergen/status/1245489476018876416
   [4]: https://www.thedailybeast.com/white-house-trots-out-grim-death-models-to-drive-home-social-distancing?via=rss&source=articles_fancylink
   [5]: https://www.thedailybeast.com/trump-obsesses-over-flu-deaths-attacks-cuomo-in-softball-fox-news-chat
   [6]: https://www.thedailybeast.com/trump-uses-coronavirus-briefing-to-warn-about-drug-cartels?source=articles&via=rss
   [7]: https://www.thedailybeast.com/newsletters?via=rss&source=footer_link_newsletters
   [8]: https://www.thedailybeast.com/membership?via=rss&source=footer_link_membership