---
title: "Managing High Blood Pressure During the Coronavirus Pandemic"
date: "2020-04-02T1859"
hero: ""
---
If you have high blood pressure, you know that letting it go unchecked
could be deadly, especially if you develop other cardiovascular
conditions. You may have also caught wind of some recent theories
suggesting that certain blood pressure drugs may increase vulnerability
to COVID-19 infection. But experts from three major organizations are
cautioning against unnecessarily stopping medications or switching them
because of unproven [coronavirus concerns][1].

In a [joint statement issued in March][2], the American College of
Cardiology, American Heart Association and Heart Failure Society of
America recommended that patients, for whom the benefits of these drugs
are known, continue taking the medications. The strong advice comes amid
speculation that certain blood pressure medications, called renin-
angiotensin system, or RAS, blockers may increase susceptibility to
COVID-19 and raise the risk of dying from the disease.

The medications, which are also referred to as renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system (RAAS) antagonists, or blockers, are commonly
prescribed to treat high blood pressure and include angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers
(ARBs).

Currently, the organizations note, there's no research demonstrating
that taking RAS blockers improves or worsens outcomes for patients with
COVID-19. But what is known is that these medications have been clearly
shown to be helpful for [hypertension][3], [heart failure][4] and
ischemic heart disease -- when the heart isn't receiving enough blood --
among other uses.

[Older people][5] and individuals with chronic disease tend to be more
vulnerable to COVID-19. For example, those with diabetes and heart
disease may be more likely to develop a severe COVID-19 infection.
Hypertension is a form of cardiovascular disease. Frequently people who
have high blood pressure also have other cardiovascular conditions like
atherosclerosis, or the narrowing of arteries due to plaque buildup.
That increases the risk of death from various causes, including [heart
attack and stroke][6].

So clinicians emphasize that it's key to pay attention to heart health
and keep blood pressure well-controlled. Having high blood pressure has
even been associated with a higher rate of dying from COVID-19. Still,
it's not clear whether having hypertension on its own -- without any
accompanying forms of cardiovascular disease -- raises the risk of dying
from COVID-19. "I just can't answer that question," says Dr. Mariell
Jessup, chief science and medical officer for the American Heart
Association. Nor is it clear if successfully managing hypertension, by
itself, will lower one's risk of death related to the novel coronavirus.

[ **READ:** [Coronavirus: What to Stock up on So You're Prepared.][7]]

But experts say that while more research on this subject is needed,
there's broad agreement that stopping blood pressure medications isn't
wise, given that uncontrolled blood pressure is proven to significantly
increase [cardiovascular risk ][8]and death. "You want to keep in the
very best health you can possibly be in, and that means whatever
medicines you're on, you continue taking those medicines," Jessup
stresses.

The speculation surrounding RAS blockers and any potential impact they
may have on vulnerability to COVID-19 is complex. But at its core, it
relates to how SARS-CoV-2 -- the virus that causes COVID-19 -- enters
the human body.

As noted in the recent joint ACC, AHA, HFSA statement: "Angiotensin
converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors have been shown to be the entry
point into human cells for SARS-CoV-2." And some animal research has
shown that RAS blockers increase the presence of these receptors. But
the impact is inconsistent and there's no conclusive research that this
affects how a person might respond to COVID-19.

"Importantly no one has shown an increase, by this class of medications,
of the presence of ACE2 in the lungs where the coronavirus presumably
interacts with ACE2 to enter the body and starts replicating," says Dr.
Daniel Batlle, a professor of nephrology and hypertension at the
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, and a kidney
specialist at Northwestern Medicine in Chicago. "Therefore, this lack of
evidence is reassuring."

Still, there's been speculation that taking medication that increases
ACE2 expression might affect how vulnerable a person is to COVID-19.
Some researchers hypothesize, as laid out recently in [The Lancet
Respiratory Medicine][9], that treating diabetes and hypertension with
ACE2-stimulating drugs could increase the risk that a person may develop
severe or fatal coronavirus infection. The researchers suggest that for
patients with cardiac diseases, high blood pressure or diabetes, another
type of blood pressure medication -- namely calcium channel blockers,
which work via a different mechanism -- could be a suitable alternative.

But others emphasize that there's just no data to support stopping RAS
blockers or switching to another blood pressure medication.

"There is no evidence in human studies that the effect of these drugs on
ACE2 expression, if any, have caused increased risk for COVID-19
infection although theoretically this could happen," Batlle says. But he
stresses that much more data are needed before patients and health
providers make any treatment changes.

[ **READ:** [Coronavirus and Ibuprofen: What to Know.][10]]

"Based on the currently available evidence there is no reason to
consider alternative antihypertensive medications," says Batlle, who co-
authored a March [article][11] published in the journal Hypertension.
"The benefits of RAS blockers on these patients clearly outweigh the
risks and there is no evidence of increased risk for COVID 19 infection
for people taking RAS blockers," Batlle says.

By contrast, he adds: "There is extensive evidence about the
complications of uncontrolled hypertension." Unchecked high blood
pressure may lead to severe cardiovascular complications including heart
attacks, strokes, pulmonary edema (which is caused by excess fluid in
the lungs, usually related to heart problems) and kidney injury, he
notes.

Dr. Murray Epstein, professor of medicine emeritus at the University of
Miami Miller School of Medicine, and a co-author on the Hypertension
article, agrees that patients definitely shouldn't stop taking their
blood pressure medication because of an "unsubstantiated notion ... that
treatment with RAS blockers might increase the risk of developing a
severe and fatal SARS-CoV-2 infection." By contrast, experts say it's
clear what will happen if patients who need to be on medicine for
hypertension stop taking the drugs. "If patients have high blood
pressure and discontinue their antihypertensive medications, their
previously controlled BP (is) no longer controlled at an acceptable
range," Epstein says.

He adds that there's not always a suitable alternative medication. For
some patients, RAS blockers -- used to treat conditions like
hypertension in tens of millions of people worldwide -- are a must. The
drugs are, for example, a mainstay of treatment for patients with
chronic heart failure, Epstein points out.

Experts encourage patients to talk to their doctors about the risks and
benefits of any medication. Clinicians say decisions to start,
discontinue or switch medications should be made collaboratively, and
only after careful discussion between the patient and health provider.

And there's something else in this unprecedented time of pandemic that
may be worth considering. People are facing not only the threat of a
highly infectious and sometimes deadly disease, but in many cases
financial pressures from lost or reduced work and [mental health
challenges][12] related to staying at home and [keeping their
distance][13] from others. That's all [putting a lot of stress on
individuals][14].

[ **Read:** [Self-Help If You Display Mild Symptoms of Coronavirus][15]]

Exactly how, or to what extent, the stress of dealing with a pandemic
may impact a person's blood pressure isn't clear. But what's known,
generally, is that "stress can certainly increase BP," Epstein says.
That's one more reason, now more than ever, to pay close attention to
hypertension and make sure it's carefully controlled.

  
  

   [1]: https://health.usnews.com/conditions/articles/human-coronavirus-types
   [2]: https://www.acc.org/latest-in-cardiology/articles/2020/03/17/08/59/hfsa-acc-aha-statement-addresses-concerns-re-using-raas-antagonists-in-covid-19
   [3]: https://health.usnews.com/conditions/heart-disease/high-blood-pressure
   [4]: https://health.usnews.com/conditions/heart-disease/congestive-heart-failure
   [5]: https://health.usnews.com/conditions/articles/how-coronavirus-affects-older-adults
   [6]: https://health.usnews.com/conditions/heart-disease/heart-attack/articles/stroke-vs-heart-attack-how-to-tell-the-difference
   [7]: https://health.usnews.com/conditions/articles/coronavirus-what-to-stock-up-on
   [8]: https://health.usnews.com/conditions/heart-disease/hypertension/slideshows/signs-of-heart-disease
   [9]: https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanres/article/PIIS2213-2600(20)30116-8/fulltext
   [10]: https://health.usnews.com/conditions/articles/coronavirus-and-ibuprofen-what-to-know
   [11]: https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.120.15082
   [12]: https://health.usnews.com/wellness/for-parents/articles/coping-with-anxiety-and-depression-during-the-coronavirus-pandemic
   [13]: https://health.usnews.com/conditions/articles/flattening-the-curve-why-social-distancing-is-important-to-combat-covid-19
   [14]: https://health.usnews.com/conditions/articles/how-to-cope-with-coronavirus-anxiety
   [15]: https://health.usnews.com/conditions/articles/treatment-for-mild-symptoms-of-coronavirus