---
title: "'Protective bubbles': How two Army generals stopped the spread of coronavirus among their soldiers"
date: "2020-04-03T0901"
hero: "http://l2.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/vU0mczrm_vExGbo47KWmvg--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media-mbst-pub-ue1.s3.amazonaws.com/creatr-uploaded-images/2020-04/49a8cc20-751a-11ea-afe7-bff05df701e6"
---
[ ][1]

[][1]

When the senior U.S. Army officer in Italy ordered the gyms on Army
installations in Vicenza closed starting Feb. 24, it wasn’t a popular
decision.

One particularly upset fitness fanatic went to the trouble of writing
“OPEN THE GYM” several hundred times in the comments section of an
anonymous customer[ feedback site][2], two days in a row.

At the time, there were no reported coronavirus cases in Vicenza, a town
of about 112,000 roughly 255 miles north of Rome, and only about 200 in
the whole of Italy. None of the cases were from the U.S. Army community,
which includes about 4,000 soldiers, 2,750 Army civilians and 8,750
dependents, split between Vicenza and Camp Darby, about 140 miles away
to the southwest near Pisa. And that was how Maj. Gen. Roger Cloutier
wanted to keep it when he shut down the gyms, as well as on-post
schools, child development centers and churches that served both
locations.

A 55-year-old infantry officer, Cloutier is formally the commander of
U.S. Army Africa, but his headquarters’ location in Vicenza makes him
what the Defense Department calls the “senior responsible officer” for
U.S. Army forces in Italy, meaning he has administrative control over
all U.S. soldiers in the country, even though most of them belong to
U.S. Army Europe, which is headquartered in Germany, for operational
purposes.

Cloutier is one of two generals that Army Secretary Ryan McCarthy and
Army Chief of Staff Gen. James McConville have highlighted repeatedly
in[ recent][3][ press][4][ conferences][5] as examples of military
leaders who have excelled in keeping their forces largely safe from the
coronavirus. The other is Gen. Robert “Abe” Abrams, who commands all
U.S. forces in South Korea.

Their success is a bright spot for a Pentagon now facing a torrent of
criticism over the firing of a captain of a U.S. aircraft carrier
stricken by the coronavirus. Acting Navy Secretary Thomas Modly said
Thursday he was removing Capt. Brett Crozier for “extremely poor
judgment” in cc’ing too many people when he sent a letter up his chain
of command detailing his concerns about how the Navy was handling his
crew’s health crisis.

Army Maj. Gen. Roger L. Cloutier, left, and Gen. Robert Abrams. (Pablo
Martinez Monsivais/AP, Li Jin-man/AP)

More

After originating in late 2019 in China, the virus was first reported in
South Korea on Jan. 20. The country appeared to have the outbreak under
control until a 61-year-old woman became a so-called
“[superspreader][6],” infecting hundreds of people, largely via her
church in Daegu, a city that is home to 2.5 million people and four U.S.
Army installations about 147 miles southeast of Seoul.

By Feb. 20, more than half of South Korea’s[ 104 confirmed cases][7]
were in Daegu. The virus was “literally at our doorsteps,” Abrams told
Pentagon reporters March 13. The four-star general took immediate action
to protect the roughly 28,500 U.S. military personnel under his command
and their dependents. Among other measures, he canceled all meetings,
formations and training events for U.S. forces across the peninsula that
involved more than 20 people. He also shut down school for military
dependents in Daegu, allowed only “mission-essential” travel to the city
for U.S. service members and requested more medical supplies.

Abrams had already taken several steps to get ahead of the outbreak:
issuing the advice now familiar to most Americans about social
distancing, washing hands and avoiding sick people; beefing up his
headquarters so the staff could monitor the outbreak 24 hours a day; and
imposing a 14-day quarantine on any member of the military community
who’d been to China recently. “At our peak, we had 77 service members,
family members and civilians in self-quarantine who had visited China,”
he said.

As Abrams took these steps, he had a key advantage: his top medical
officer, Army Col. Clinton Murray, who last summer began a one-year tour
as U.S. Forces Korea surgeon. A command surgeon in the military can be
any sort of doctor, Abrams noted, but “this year, by sheer luck, I
happen to have one of the Army’s leading infectious disease doctors.”

Army Col. Clinton Murray. (APG News)

More

Working closely with the Korean Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Murray and his medical team came up with a set of metrics
that allowed Abrams to be ready with a series of preprogrammed moves
when certain conditions were met. Thus, when on Feb. 24 a 61-year-old
widow in Daegu became the first U.S. military dependent to test positive
for COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, Abrams was
prepared.

He immediately raised the risk level to “high” for all U.S. forces in
the country, limited base access to only those whose presence was
“mission-essential,” instituted telework procedures and insisted that
all those entering the bases be medically screened, which required
filling out a questionnaire and having their temperatures taken. The
number of people trying to come onto base dropped 60 percent, “which
further reduced the potential spread” of the coronavirus to U.S. Forces
Korea troops, Abrams[ said.][7]

The general also shut down all Defense Department schooling for U.S.
children on the peninsula and placed all bars, restaurants and movie
theaters off-limits to U.S. Forces Korea personnel and their families.
The new rules, which remain in place, mean U.S. Forces Korea personnel
and their family members are allowed off base only to visit medical
providers, grocery stores and pharmacies, as well as to travel to and
from work. For those working on base, there are strict social distancing
requirements, while all commonly used items and surfaces are repeatedly
wiped down throughout the workday.

From the start, Murray noted in an email to Yahoo News, Abrams treated
the spread of the coronavirus “like a combat operation” and adopted the
social media-friendly mantra #KILLthevirus (which even made it into at
least one of President Donald Trump’s tweets).

The aim, Abrams said, was to create “protective bubbles around our
installations, just to keep the virus out of our formations, out of our
workforce, out of our homes and out of our schools.” Abrams’s troops
were also ready if any person associated with U.S. Forces Korea tested
positive, with teams poised to immediately trace that individual’s
contacts, place any potentially infected person in quarantine and
thoroughly clean all locations the individual had visited in the
previous 48 hours.

Gen. Robert Abrams, commander of the United Nations Command, speaks
during a commemorative ceremony for the 66th anniversary of the Korean
War armistice agreement in the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) dividing the two
Koreas, July 27. (Jung Yeon-je/Pool via AP)

More

So far the steps appear to be working. On Feb. 25, a soldier stationed
at Camp Carroll, just outside Daegu, became the[ first U.S. service
member][8] in South Korea to test positive (although as it can take up
to two weeks for an infected individual to exhibit symptoms, that
soldier almost certainly contracted the disease before the new measures
went into effect). But in the five weeks since then, as the total number
of cases in South Korea surged to[ almost 10,000][9], only one other
U.S. service member in the country has[ tested positive][10], a
testament to the effectiveness of Abrams’s measures when applied early
and with rigor.

(About a dozen other individuals associated with the command —
dependents, U.S. contractors, Defense Department civilians and local
hires — have also tested positive. In almost all cases those people
lived off base.)

No single measure has proved more important than any other in
controlling the outbreak, according to Murray. “The entire package is
required,” he wrote.

From his Vicenza headquarters 5,500 miles away, Cloutier was able to
draw on Abrams’s lessons learned as he prepared to face the coronavirus
onslaught.

On the day he closed down almost all public activities for U.S. soldiers
in Italy, he put out a Facebook video message to his community in which
he did not mince words. “The situation is not going to cure itself
overnight,” he said in a Feb. 24[ Facebook][11] video message to the
Army community in Italy. “In fact, it could get worse before it gets
better.”

Cloutier said one factor behind his decision to shut so much down was
that he was trying to stay in step with the local Italian authorities,
who had also closed schools that day. But he also wanted to get ahead of
the virus, and he had a plan for how to do that.

Cloutier’s spokesman, Col. Ryan Dillon, said his boss likes to say that
combating the virus is like fighting a wildfire: “Dig the fire break,
dig it early and dig it wide to stop the spread.”

Army Maj. Gen. Roger L. Cloutier, chief of staff, U.S. Africa Command,
at a Pentagon briefing in 2018. (Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP)

More

Cloutier’s decision to close the gyms, theaters, churches and schools
before there were any confirmed cases in Vicenza and relatively few in
Italy was grounded in his belief that it is “better to act radically
early,” Dillon said. Although “many in the community” initially
questioned the need to shut activities down, “those decisions then put
us in a strong position to plan and prepare how to further protect the
force,” he said.

In the meantime, Italy, with a population of about 60 million, now leads
the world in deaths from COVID-19, with almost 14,000 fatalities out of
more than 115,000 cases as of Thursday, according to researchers at[
Johns Hopkins University][9]. News[ stories][12] of Italian doctors
having to make wrenching[ decisions][13] about which patients to try to
save first have filled American readers with foreboding as the virus
spreads across the United States.

Five and a half weeks after Cloutier acted to protect his community of
15,500 Americans, fewer than five of them have tested positive. None
have died. By comparison, by March 27, the U.S. military community in
Stuttgart, Germany, had at least 69 confirmed cases, including troops,
Defense Department civilians, contractors and dependents, according to[
Stars and Stripes][14]. (The Defense Department has since banned
individual military organizations or headquarters from releasing numbers
of confirmed cases.)

In neither Korea nor Italy are U.S. military officials ready to declare
victory just yet. While South Korea appears to be past the worst of its
coronavirus outbreak, the death toll in Italy continues to rise
precipitously. Cloutier’s aim remains the same: to protect the force
using “clear policy that is ruthlessly enforced … so that each
subordinate command is not doing its own thing,” Dillon said.

And as for the gyms, which remain closed? “Nobody’s complaining about
that now,” he said.

_____

[ _Click here_][15] _for the_[ _latest coronavirus news and
updates_][16] _. According to experts, people over 60 and those who are
immunocompromised continue to be the most at risk. If you have
questions, please reference the_[ _CDC_][17] _and_[ _WHO’s_][18]
_resource guides._

 **Read more:**

   [1]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus
   [2]: https://ice.disa.mil/index.cfm?fa=card&sp=83504&s=321&dep=*DoD&sc=15
   [3]: https://www.army.mil/article/233868/covid_19_response_secretary_mccarthy_hosts_press_conference_with_gen_mcconville
   [4]: https://www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Transcripts/Transcript/Article/2127878/army-leadership-press-briefing-on-covid-19-response-efforts/
   [5]: https://www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Transcripts/Transcript/Article/2129433/army-officials-hold-a-defense-department-news-briefing-on-covid-19-efforts/
   [6]: https://www.livescience.com/coronavirus-superspreader-south-korea-church.html
   [7]: https://www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Transcripts/Transcript/Article/2112176/gen-robert-b-abrams-holds-a-press-briefing-on-us-forces-koreas-response-to-covi/
   [8]: https://www.usfk.mil/Media/News/Article/2094200/usfk-service-member-confirmed-with-covid-19/
   [9]: https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html
   [10]: https://www.usfk.mil/Media/News/Article/2127687/usfk-service-member-confirmed-with-covid-19/
   [11]: https://www.facebook.com/618591021560489/videos/1262272447299060/
   [12]: https://www.thedailybeast.com/on-the-front-line-against-coronavirus-in-locked-down-italy-deciding-who-lives-and-who-dies
   [13]: https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/03/who-gets-hospital-bed/607807/
   [14]: https://www.stripes.com/news/europe/coronavirus-cases-soar-to-at-least-69-in-stuttgart-military-community-as-army-struggles-to-contain-virus-1.623918
   [15]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus-covid-19-news-and-live-updates-120246923.html
   [16]: https://news.yahoo.com/coronavirus/
   [17]: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/summary.html
   [18]: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019