---
title: "Venezuela navy vessel sinks after 'ramming cruise ship'"
date: "2020-04-03T1154"
hero: "http://l1.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/HuuP3xD0GV04sGYforqqlg--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-gb/bbc_us_articles_995/b881a70aeffa7a079e4e8aa0f71ccd30"
---
A Venezuelan navy coastal patrol boat sank in the Caribbean after
allegedly ramming a cruise ship that it had ordered to change direction.

The owners of the Portuguese-flagged RCGS Resolute said the naval vessel
Naiguata also fired shots in an "act of aggression in international
waters”.

The collision left the cruise ship, which has a reinforced hull for
sailing in icy waters, with only minor damage.

Venezuela accused the Resolute of an act of "aggression and piracy".

 **Related Video: US to Deploy Anti-Drug Navy Ships Near Venezuela**

It also said it "did not rule out" that the cruise ship "was
transporting mercenaries to attack military bases in Venezuela".

President Nicolás Maduro has previously accused the United States and
other countries of plotting to overthrow him.

The incident took place near La Tortuga Island, a Venezuelan federal
dependency, on 30 March.

Columbia Cruise Services, which operates the Resolute, said the cruise
ship had been carrying out routine engine maintenance in international
waters more than 13 nautical miles (24km) from La Tortuga.

[A statement from the Hamburg-based company said][1] that shortly after
midnight, the Naiguata radioed the Resolute, questioning its intentions,
and ordered the captain to follow it to a port on Isla Margarita, to the
east.

"While the master was in contact with the head office, gunshots were
fired and, shortly thereafter, the navy vessel approached the starboard
side at speed... and purposely collided with the RCGS Resolute," it
added.

"The navy vessel continued to ram the starboard bow in an apparent
attempt to turn the ship’s head towards Venezuelan territorial waters."

Although the Resolute - a purpose-built polar expedition vessel -
suffered minor damage, the patrol boat began taking on water after
hitting its bulbous bow, according to the statement.

Columbia Cruise Services said the Resolute remained in the area for more
than an hour and contacted rescue co-ordinators on the Dutch Caribbean
island of Curaçao. All attempts to contact the Naiguata went unanswered
and the Resolute eventually sailed to Willemstad on Curaçao, it added.

[A statement by the Venezuelan military (in Spanish)][2] accused the
Resolute of "cowardly and criminal" behaviour, "since it did not attend
to the rescue of the crew".

It said all the crew of the Naiguata had been rescued, but did not give
details.

[Defence Minister Vladimir Padrino López accused the Resolute of ramming
the vessel][3], "which caused its sinking".

President Maduro said an investigation had been launched and he expected
"maximum collaboration" from authorities in Curaçao.

   [1]: https://www.columbia-cs.com/statement-on-rcgs-resolute-incident/
   [2]: http://www.mindefensa.gob.ve/mindefensa/2020/03/31/comunicado-oficial-de-la-fuerza-armada-nacional-bolivariana-5/
   [3]: http://www.minci.gob.ve/venezuela-denuncia-incursion-ilegal-de-buque-portugues-en-aguas-jurisdiccionales/