---
title: "'It is everywhere already': Fox News hosts amp up the pressure on Trump to give up on coronavirus lockdowns and reopen the economy"
date: "2020-04-03T2147"
hero: "http://l.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/h.oVKOPQoydp7HDLguOS.g--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/EN/business_insider_articles_888/3b94c409cbb1d66f39cd2c73a6198669"
---
Screenshot/Fox News

  * A slew of Fox News opinion hosts and anchors are pushing back on public health experts and urging President Donald Trump to abandon its social distancing policies and reopen the economy. 

  * Primetime host Tucker Carlson attacked "the public health establishment," which he argued "failed us badly" by recommending stay-home orders that are hurting the economy. 

  * Fox commentator Melissa Francis argued on Friday that the virus is "everywhere already" in New York and she's "losing faith" in social distancing policies as the economy shrinks. 

  * On "Fox and Friends," one of the president's favorite Fox New programs, co-host Brian Kilmeade called the economic damage from the virus "a self-inflicted wound."

  * The Fox News pundits are ignoring widespread consensus among public health experts and government officials that the only way to save thousands, if not millions, of American lives is to stay home. 

  * The US has the highest number of coronavirus cases in the world: more than 260,000, or about one-quarter of global cases. 

  * [Visit Business Insider's homepage for more stories][1].

#### Related Video: How Long Will Social Distancing Last? It's
Complicated.

A slew of Fox News opinion hosts and anchors are pushing back on public
health experts, including the White House coronavirus task force, and
urging President Donald Trump to abandon its social distancing policies
and reopen the economy.

Primetime host Tucker Carlson [argued][2] on his Thursday night program
that "one of the main lessons of this crisis is that the public health
establishment failed us badly" by recommending stay-home orders and
other social distancing policies that are hurting the economy.

"What would've happened, for example, if we'd adopted a more
conventional response to this epidemic?" Carlson said. "What if we'd
asked the elderly and immunocompromised and anyone else facing
statistically higher rates of risk to stay inside, cloistered away? And
then at the same time allow the rest of the population to use informed
common sense and continue to work?"

He went on, "What if we'd done that a month ago? Would the death rate
today be much higher than it is now? Maybe, maybe not. We don't know.
But it's clearly a conversation we should've had before we locked the
entire country down and put 10 million people out of work. But we didn't
have that conversation. Instead, we outsourced the decision to public
health officials."

Carlson and other Fox News pundits are ignoring widespread consensus
among infectious disease and public health experts that the only way to
slow the spread of the virus and prevent thousands, if not millions, of
deaths is to keep people at home until modeling shows it's safe to
reopen businesses, schools, and public places.

Fox News commentator Melissa Francis argued on Friday that the virus is
"everywhere already" in New York and she's "losing faith" in the stay-
home orders states have implemented across the country as the economy
implodes. She suggested the economic fallout from the lockdown is
scarier than the deadly virus itself.

"It does seem like it's spread all over New York, so at this point I
don't know about the efficacy of staying inside indefinitely," Francis
[said on][3] Fox's "Outnumbered." "Who doesn't know 10, 12 people who
have it at this point, personally? It has run rampant all over this city
at least."

Fox News host Harris Faulkner, who Trump recently [called][4] "one of my
favorite people," pushed back gently on Francis and interrupted to ask a
doctor on the panel to give her perspective. The doctor, Janette
Nesheiwat, argued "you can't put a price tag on lives."

On "Fox and Friends," one of the president's favorite Fox programs, co-
host Brian Kilmeade argued on Friday that the economic damage from the
virus is avoidable.

"This is a self-inflicted wound, it's a slow-motion car wreck that we
brought on ourselves," Kilmeade said. "We should talk about how many
people are working ... I'd rather find out the 20% that are still on
their jobs ... we're an anomaly now."



At least 90% of the country — 297 million Americans — are affected by
some kind of stay-at-home order. State governments have asked residents
to shelter in place and go out only for essential services, with the
goal of encouraging social distancing, and thereby reducing the spread
of the coronavirus and "[flattening the curve][5]" so healthcare systems
aren't overwhelmed.

But a handful of governors have so far refused to issue statewide stay
home orders in their states.

Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation's top infectious disease expert, is
frustrated with the lack of a federal mandate and on Thursday said "I
don't understand why" the president hasn't issued a nation-wide stay
home order.

Many of Fox News' [most high-profile hosts and pundits spent weeks][6]
in February and March aggressively downplaying the threat posed by the
virus and accusing Democrats and the media of hyping the global health
crisis to hurt Trump.

Shortly after the Trump administration finally began cracking down on
the virus as it began its rapid spread throughout the country last
month, several Fox News hosts [began making the case][7] that the
economic fallout from widespread lockdowns will be a greater price to
pay than the additional lives that would be lost if the economy reopens.

"Our ruling class and their TV mouthpieces whipping up fear over this
virus — they can afford an indefinite shutdown. Working Americans can't,
they'll be crushed by it," host Steve Hilton, a former adviser to
British Prime Minister David Cameron, said on March 23. "You know that
famous phrase, 'the cure is worse than the disease?' That is exactly the
territory we're hurtling towards."

Just a few hours later, Trump tweeted, "WE CANNOT LET THE CURE BE WORSE
THAN THE PROBLEM ITSELF."

Since then, many of the president's allies have argued that older
Americans and others more vulnerable to the disease should sacrifice
themselves for the good of the economy.

During his Thursday night program, Carlson defended Texas Lt. Gov. Dan
Patrick, who argued that "lots of grandparents" were willing to die of
COVID-19 if it meant the economy could get back up and running more
quickly.

 _Aylin Woodward and Rhea Mahbubani contributed to this report._

[Business Insider][8]

   [1]: https://www.businessinsider.com/?hprecirc-bullet?utm_source=yahoo.com&utm_medium=referral
   [2]: https://www.salon.com/2020/04/03/tucker-carlson-not-job-of-public-health-officials-to-make-big-decisions-about-covid-19-response/
   [3]: https://twitter.com/LisPower1/status/1246112193126506508
   [4]: https://www.rev.com/blog/transcripts/donald-trump-coronavirus-town-hall-transcript-march-24-trump-wants-to-restart-the-economy-by-easter
   [5]: https://www.businessinsider.com/us-one-week-enforce-social-distancing-flatten-curve-coronavirus-2020-3?utm_source=yahoo.com&utm_medium=referral
   [6]: https://www.businessinsider.com/fox-news-is-downplaying-the-coronavirus-to-more-vulnerable-audience-2020-2?utm_source=yahoo.com&utm_medium=referral
   [7]: https://www.businessinsider.com/coronavirus-fox-pushing-trump-to-prioritize-the-economy-over-health-2020-3?utm_source=yahoo.com&utm_medium=referral
   [8]: https://www.businessinsider.com/coronavirus-fox-news-hosts-pressure-trump-end-lockdowns-reopen-economy-2020-4