---
title: "Coronavirus: Holland America lets off cruise passengers; 14 critically ill taken to Florida hospitals"
date: "2020-04-03T2252"
hero: "http://l1.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/E0K1FqoM7t6hnI2flrLxvg--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-us/usa_today_travel_320/87e7b9432bde0e5c5cb6ae06a5391d40"
---
Passengers from the ill-fated [Holland America Zaandam cruise ship][1]
were carefully freed from their cabins and allowed to touch dry land on
Friday for the first time in weeks, following the removal of 14
critically ill people who were wheeled off to Florida hospitals bracing
for an onslaught of coronavirus patients.

The Zaandam and the Rotterdam, [which rendezvoused last week][2] to
transfer healthy passengers to the Rotterdam, were both given permission
to disembark passengers at Port Everglades in Fort Lauderdale, Florida,
after [days of negotiation with local officials][3] who feared it would
divert needed resources from a region that has seen a [spike in COVID-19
cases][4].

About 250 people have reported influenza-like symptoms, [which are
similar to those of the novel coronavirus][5], since March 22, including
17 aboard the Rotterdam, according to a docking plan.

In a Friday press briefing at the White House, President Donald Trump
remarked that he worked with Florida Governor Ron DeSantis and military
doctors "to take care of these people" and help "the humanitarian
catastrophe."

"We (couldn't) let them float aimlessly into the ocean looking for port
as they've been doing for a long time and I made the decision we had to
take them," Trump added.

 **It was unclear when the bodies of[four passengers who died on the
Zaandam][6] would be removed from the ship. Two of the four deaths on
board the Zaandam have been blamed on COVID-19, and causes of death for
the other two have not been disclosed.**

The exodus from the Zaandaam and its sister ship the Rotterdam was
expected to continue throughout the day. [Floridians were getting off
first][7], followed by other passengers. Buses were taking people
healthy enough to travel directly to the airport, where they’ll board
chartered flights home without going through the terminal.

At least four buses brought the first small groups to Fort Lauderdale-
Hollywood International Airport on Friday morning, where they prepared
to board two planes waiting on the tarmac. The passengers wore masks,
while paramedics and airline workers were fully suited up and masked in
protective gear.

In a document outlining the disembarkation procedure, Holland America
said the first group, which includes around 1,200 passengers who are
asymptomatic, will be allowed to disembark Friday or Saturday after
passing a health screening.

They will also go through customs and border patrol processes at Port
Everglades, rather than at the airport.

 **Passengers on board the MS Zaandam and the MS Rotterdam who have been
in limbo for more than a week were readying to leave the ship on
Thursday.**

 **On Wednesday night, Faye and Ed Hoover, among the passengers on board
the Rotterdam received a message: Pack your bags.**

 **"We've been told already last night to have our luggage ready to go
this morning and to fill out the health forms and get our passports
ready," Ed told USA TODAY Thursday afternoon.**

 **The pair were getting on a plane early Friday afternoon getting ready
for departure. The "process was seamless and pain free," Ed said. "Very
organized." They had police escort the whole way.**

Holland America said the second group, which includes 26 symptomatic
passengers who are not yet fit to travel, will remain on board the ship.
All those passengers will be required to quarantine on board. Once they
are asymptomatic for 72 hours, they will be allowed to disembark under
the same protocol as the first group.

The rest of the crew will remain on board.

Port Everglades traffic records confirmed the arrival of the Zaandam and
Rotterdam after 5 p.m. local time Thursday. There were 442 guests and
603 crew on the Zaandam, and 808 guests and 583 crew on the Rotterdam.

 _Contributing: Associated Press_

 _This article originally appeared on USA TODAY:[Coronavirus: Holland
America cruise ships disembark in Florida][8]_

   [1]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/travel/cruises/2020/04/02/coronavirus-holland-america-ships-dock-fort-lauderdale/5110778002/
   [2]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/travel/cruises/2020/03/28/covid-19-holland-america-splitting-up-its-healthy-sick-passengers/2933381001/
   [3]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/travel/cruises/2020/03/30/coronavirus-holland-america-ships-headed-florida-amid-questions/5086235002/
   [4]: https://www.usatoday.com/in-depth/news/2020/03/03/coronavirus-map-tracking-spread-covid-19-outbreak-us-and-worldwide/4906772002/
   [5]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/health/2020/03/20/coronavirus-allergies-cold-flu-strep-these-differences/2882663001/
   [6]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/travel/cruises/2020/03/27/coronavirus-4-dead-138-sick-holland-america-cruise-limbo/2927031001/
   [7]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/travel/cruises/2020/04/01/coronavirus-thousands-carnival-passengers-sea-holland-america-florida/5101845002/
   [8]: https://www.usatoday.com/story/travel/cruises/2020/04/03/coronavirus-holland-america-cruise-ships-disembark-florida/2938963001/