---
title: "April to treat stargazers to 1st meteor shower in months and these other celestial events"
date: "2020-03-31T1832"
hero: "http://l1.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/8C0l0c8dRoyJZLqz7FQs.w--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-us/accuweather_297/a9e1ae3ceda1b902a1ee7eaa0f232ea9"
---
Springtime stargazers will have plenty to look for throughout April,
ranging from a meteor shower to the rare opportunity to see a comet.

The wide variety of astronomy events this month will be great for people
looking to spend some time outside under the night sky, including
families with young children, as they will not require any special
equipment apart from a blanket, warm clothes and a clear sky.

Here are the top three astronomy events to look for in April:

 **1\. Super Pink Moon  
When:** April 7-8

The moon will be the main feature in the night sky during the first full
week of April as it will be the biggest and brightest supermoon of 2020.

The supermoon will rise on the night of April 7, glowing all night long,
and will be bright enough to cast shadows on the ground. Although it
will appear slightly bigger and brighter than normal, [the difference
will be subtle and may be difficult for the average observer to
notice][1].

April's full moon is also known as the Pink Moon, but contrary to its
name, the moon will not appear pink. Instead, it has been given this
nickname due to the phlox, a perennial plant that blooms in April with
pink flowers.

![][2]  
---  
A view of the full pink moon, in Lakatamia, a suburb of capital Nicosia,
Cyprus, Friday, April 19, 2019. (AP Photo/Petros Karadjias)  
  
**2\. Lyrid meteor shower  
When:** April 21-22

April 22 is known around the world as Earth Day, and the global event
will kick off with a light show from Mother Nature as the Lyrid meteor
shower reaches its peak.

This is the first major meteor shower since January and will bring 15 to
20 shooting stars per hour on the night of April 21 into the early hours
of April 22. This year will be a particularly good year for the "Earth
Day meteor shower" as it occurs on a moonless night, meaning darker
skies for onlookers.

[CLICK HERE FOR THE FREE ACCUWEATHER APP][3]

"These meteors are best seen from the Northern Hemisphere where the
radiant is high in the sky at dawn," the [American Meteor Society
explained on their website][4]. "Activity from this shower can be seen
from the Southern Hemisphere, but at a lower rate."

Folks that miss the Lyrids will only have to wait about two weeks for
the next chance to see a meteor shower, with the Eta Aquarids set to
peak during the first full week of May.

 **3\. Comet ATLAS  
When:** Late April

A newly discovered comet will soon make a splash in the night sky as it
grows brighter throughout April, potentially becoming bright enough to
see with the naked eye by the end of the month.

Comet ATLAS, also known as [Comet C/2019 Y4][5], was discovered on Dec.
28, 2019, by astronomers using the Asteroid Terrestrial-Impact Last
Alert System (ATLAS) in Hawaii. It is still too dim to see without a
telescope, but it is expected to get much brighter in the coming weeks.

![][6]  
---  
Animation of a comet. (NASA/JPL-Caltech)  
  
"If predictions are correct, Comet ATLAS might reach a [visual
magnitude][7] of +5 around May 1, 2020. That is theoretically bright
enough to be seen with the eye, but the fuzziness of faint comets can
make them harder to spot than comparably bright stars," [Earthsky
explained on their website][8].

"To spot the comet, look in the northern sky. It is not far from the Big
and Little Dippers," [AccuWeather Astronomy Blogger Dave Samuhel
said][9].

Comet ATLAS is projected to make its closest approach to Earth on May
23, followed by its closest approach to the sun on May 31.

On March 19 at 11:50 p.m., winter transitioned to spring across the
Northern Hemisphere during the [earliest March equinox since 1896][10].

Hours later, just before sunrise, early risers were treated to a
celestial alignment as the crescent moon fell in line with Jupiter,
Mars, Saturn and Mercury in the morning sky.

Around the same time, a [newly released photo revealed a stunning view
of Jupiter like we've never seen it before][11]. The image was captured
by the Juno spacecraft which is orbiting the solar system's largest
planet.

At the beginning of March, NASA announced that it was[ accepting
applications for the astronaut program][12] that would fly on future
trips to space. This includes the possibility of being on one of the
upcoming trips to the moon in the 2020s.

A few days later, the space agency announced the name of the next
visitor being sent to the Red Planet. [The Mars 2020 rover was
officially given the name Perseverance][13], chosen from a nationwide
student competition. Perseverance was once of 28,000 name entries and
was proposed by an elementary school student from Virginia.

   [1]: https://www.accuweather.com/en/weather-news/what-is-a-supermoon-2/433604
   [2]: https://media.zenfs.com/en-us/accuweather_297/aeee2294d244352e83ae1e5feacc1fc6
   [3]: https://downloads.accuweather.com/
   [4]: https://www.amsmeteors.org/meteor-showers/meteor-shower-calendar/
   [5]: http://www.aerith.net/comet/catalog/2019Y4/2019Y4.html
   [6]: https://media.zenfs.com/en-us/accuweather_297/83b61e9e872b0e39713224d98c4d88b7
   [7]: https://earthsky.org/astronomy-essentials/what-is-stellar-magnitude
   [8]: https://earthsky.org/space/how-to-see-bright-comet-c-2019-y4-atlas
   [9]: https://www.accuweather.com/en/weather-blogs/astronomy/a-new-comet-is-brightening-quickly/705953
   [10]: https://www.accuweather.com/en/space-news/spring-is-coming-earlier-in-u-s-this-year-than-it-has-since-1896/684213
   [11]: https://www.accuweather.com/en/space-news/this-gorgeous-picture-of-jupiter-from-nasa-is-just-what-we-need-right-now/704232
   [12]: https://www.accuweather.com/en/space-news/want-to-go-to-the-moon-nasa-is-now-taking-new-astronaut-applications/695351
   [13]: https://www.accuweather.com/en/space-news/meet-perseverance-nasas-mars-2020-rover-has-a-new-name/696552