---
title: "Have I already had coronavirus? How would I know and what should I do?"
date: 2020-04-01T1345
hero: "http://l2.yimg.com/uu/api/res/1.2/7KgZtXGKR1OO4jxeb1_XRQ--/YXBwaWQ9eXRhY2h5b247aD04Njt3PTEzMDs-/https://media.zenfs.com/en-GB/the_guardian_765/7055ca9364bbd7e2b9d6fa3249b7adf0"
---
Covid-19 symptoms vary widely, and undertesting in many countries means
that many people may have already had the coronavirus without having
received a positive diagnosis. Is it possible to find out, and how
should you behave if you think you may have been infected?

##  **Is there any way to know whether someone has had Covid-19 in the
past?**

 **Dr** **William Hillmann:** At this point, we don’t have a test to
tell that. We are developing antibody tests to check for a prior
infection, but those aren’t ready for clinical use yet. The only
definitive way to know that you’ve had it is to get tested while you
have it and to have that test be positive.

##  **Could I have had it and been asymptomatic?**

 **Hillmann** : Coronavirus is actually quite a significant spectrum of
symptoms, from people who are entirely asymptomatic and would have no
idea that they have it to people with very mild, cold-like symptoms –
runny nose, congestion, sore throat – to people with more flu-like
symptoms – high fevers, muscle aches, shortness of breath and cough. All
the way up to people with severe illness, who we’re seeing in the
hospital with respiratory failure, requiring ICU care. _(Editor’s note:
recent[reports][1] __suggest that loss of smell and taste are also signs
of Covid-19 infection.)_

##  **What percentage of carriers are asymptomatic?**

 **Dr David Buchholz:** Right now in New York, we’re only testing the
sickest possible people. So we have no idea. However, there was a [study
in Iceland][2], which tested [a large segment of its] population, and
50% of the people who tested positive had no symptoms.

##  **Are people who are asymptomatic also contagious?**

 **Hillmann:** A significant proportion of people who are totally
asymptomatic are contagious for some portion of time. We just don’t know
[for how long] at this point, because we don’t have the kind of testing
available to screen for asymptomatic infections.

When people are symptomatic, they’re contagious. A day or two before
they become symptomatic, they’re likely contagious as well. A virus
builds up and starts to shed, and then after symptoms resolve, people
can still be contagious for a couple of days. We have some evidence of
viral shed even a couple of weeks after symptoms are resolved. It’s hard
to know if that’s actual live virus, which is still able to infect
somebody, or if that’s just dead virus that the body is shedding.

##  **Should someone behave differently if they think, but don’t know
for certain, that they have already had it?**

 **Buchholz:** We all have to be role models. If we’re all in it
together, we all should be doing social distancing.

 **Hillmann:** Since there’s no real way to know at this point who might
have had it, unless you’re symptomatic, you get a swab and are
definitively diagnosed with it, I would just act as if you hadn’t had
it. Keep doing all of those things that we all should be doing at this
point: social distancing and hand hygiene.

##  **If I think I may have had it, do I have an ethical obligation to
tell people I came in contact with? Even if it may in fact just have
been a cold?**

 **Buchholz:** I would, absolutely. I’m in New York, and it was
definitely in the community before we knew it. So, yeah, any family
members and close friends, maybe somebody you work next to, I think I
would just alert them, especially if it was in the last 14 days. If it’s
been more than 14 days, they would have gotten sick by now if they had
significant exposure.

 **Hillmann:** It’s up to every individual about what they feel is
right. If somebody is _diagnosed_ with a case of coronavirus, I might
feel a little bit more strongly that they should tell people because if
you’re in close contact with a healthcare worker, it could have
implications for precautions that healthcare worker needs to take.

##  **If I’ve had it, can I get it again?**

 **Buchholz:** There’s not been any evidence that anyone’s gotten it
more than once. Someone with a normal immune system that can react to
the virus and get better should have immunity for quite some time, at
least a year, if not lifelong.

There have been [reports out of China][3] suggesting people are testing
positive for Covid-19 a second time. Most scientists think it is an
issue around the inaccuracy of the testing and not that people are
having two separate cases of the disease.

 **Experts**

 _Dr_ _David Buchholz,_ _senior_ _founding_ _medical_ _director,_
_primary_ _care,_ _assistant_ _professor of_ _pediatrics, Columbia
University Irving_ _medical_ _center_

 _Dr_ _William Hillmann,_ _associate_ _inpatient_ _physician_ _director
at Massachusetts_ _general_ _hospital_

   [1]: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/22/health/coronavirus-symptoms-smell-taste.html
   [2]: https://www.government.is/news/article/2020/03/15/Large-scale-testing-of-general-population-in-Iceland-underway/
   [3]: https://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2020/03/27/822407626/mystery-in-wuhan-recovered-coronavirus-patients-test-negative-then-positive